1000	PURPOSE: Loss of intercellular adhesion and increased cell motility promote tumor cell invasion. In the present study, E- and N-cadherin, members of the classical  cadherin family, are investigated as inducers of epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) that is thought to play a fundamental role during the early steps of invasion and metastasis of carcinomas. Cell growth factors are known to  regulate cell adhesion molecules. The purpose of the study presented here was to  investigate whether a gain in N-cadherin in pancreatic cancer is involved in the  process of metastasis via EMT and whether its expression is affected by growth factors. EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: We immunohistochemically examined the expression of N- and E-cadherins and vimentin, a mesenchymal marker, in pancreatic primary and  metastatic tumors. Correlations among the expressions of N-cadherin, transforming growth factor (TGF)beta, and fibroblast growth factor 2 was evaluated in both tumors, and the induction of cadherin and vimentin by growth factors was examined in cultured cell lines. RESULTS: N-cadherin expression was observed in 13 of 30 primary tumors and in 8 of 15 metastatic tumors. N-cadherin expression correlated with neural invasion (P = 0.008), histological type (P = 0.043), fibroblast growth factor expression in primary tumors (P = 0.007), and TGF expression (P = 0.004) and vimentin (P = 0.01) in metastatic tumors. Vimentin, a mesenchymal marker, was observed in a few cancer cells of primary tumor but was substantially expressed in liver metastasis. TGF stimulated N-cadherin and vimentin protein expression and decreased E-cadherin expression of Panc-1 cells with morphological change. CONCLUSION: This study provided the morphological evidence of EMT in pancreatic carcinoma and revealed that overexpression of N-cadherin is involved in EMT and is affected by growth factors.
10009	Contact-inhibition ubiquitously exists in non-transformed cells and explains the  poor regenerative capacity of in vivo human retinal pigment epithelial cells (RPE) during aging, injury and diseases. RPE injury or degeneration may unlock mitotic block mediated by contact inhibition but may also promote epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) contributing to retinal blindness. Herein, we confirmed that EMT ensued in post-confluent ARPE-19 cells when contact inhibition was disrupted with EGTA followed by addition of EGF and FGF-2 because  of activation of canonical Wnt and Smad/ZEB signaling. In contrast, knockdown of  p120-catenin (p120) unlocked such mitotic block by activating p120/Kaiso, but not activating canonical Wnt and Smad/ZEB signaling, thus avoiding EMT. Nuclear BrdU  labeling was correlated with nuclear release of Kaiso through p120 nuclear translocation, which was associated with activation of RhoA-ROCK signaling, destabilization of microtubules. Prolonged p120 siRNA knockdown followed by withdrawal further expanded RPE into more compact monolayers with a normal phenotype and a higher density. This new strategy based on selective activation of p120/Kaiso but not Wnt/beta-catenin signaling obviates the need of using single cells and the risk of EMT, and may be deployed to engineer surgical grafts containing RPE and other tissues.
10013	The aberrant expression of transforming growth factor (TGF)-beta1 in the tumor microenvironment and fibrotic lesions plays a critical role in tumor progression  and tissue fibrosis by inducing epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). EMT promotes tumor cell motility and invasiveness. How EMT affects motility and invasion is not well understood. Here we report that HDAC6 is a novel modulator of TGF-beta1-induced EMT. HDAC6 is a microtubule-associated deacetylase that predominantly deacetylates nonhistone proteins, including alpha-tubulin, and regulates cell motility. We showed that TGF-beta1-induced EMT is accompanied by HDAC6-dependent deacetylation of alpha-tubulin. Importantly, inhibition of HDAC6  by small interfering RNA or the small molecule inhibitor tubacin attenuated the TGF-beta1-induced EMT markers, such as the aberrant expression of epithelial and  mesenchymal peptides, as well as the formation of stress fibers. Reduced expression of HDAC6 also impaired the activation of SMAD3 in response to TGF-beta1. Conversely, inhibition of SMAD3 activation substantially impaired HDAC6-dependent deacetylation of alpha-tubulin as well as the expression of EMT markers. These findings reveal a novel function of HDAC6 in EMT by intercepting the TGF-beta-SMAD3 signaling cascade. Our results identify HDAC6 as a critical regulator of EMT and a potential therapeutic target against pathological EMT, a key event for tumor progression and fibrogenesis.
100133941	The epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) has been linked to induction of a stem-cell like phenotype, characterized by altered cell surface marker expression and increased tumor formation. The aim of this study was to investigate whether EMT correlates with CD24+CD44+ and CD133+ cells in pancreatic cancer. The morphology of untreated and gemcitabine-treated SW1990 gemcitabine-resistant cells and normal SW1990 cells were compared. NF-kappaB p65 expression was knocked down using siRNA. Vimentin and E-cadherin expression were analyzed using western  blotting, and CD24+CD44+, CD133+ cells were quantified by FACS. Additionally, immunohistochemistry of EMT-associated markers and stem cell-associated markers were performed in 41 cases of human pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma. In SW1990 gemcitabine-resistant cells, gemcitabine induced a mesenchymal cell phenotype, expression of EMT-related molecular markers and increased CD24+CD44+ and CD133+ cells compared to untreated SW1990 gemcitabine-resistant and SW1990 cells. Knockdown of NF-kappaB p65 inhibited the ability of gemcitabine to increase the proportion of CD24+CD44+ or CD133+ cells and expression of EMT-related molecular  markers. In human pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma, significant correlations were observed between expression of the EMT-associated markers vimentin and E-cadherin, and stem cell-associated markers CD24, CD133 and CD44. This study demonstrated that EMT correlated with CD24+CD44+ and CD133+ cells in pancreatic cancer. This study also suggests that EMT may induce cancer stem-like cells in pancreatic cancer, with different degrees of EMT probability inducing different proportions of CD24+CD44+ and CD133+ cells.
10049	DKK1 (dickkopf 1 homologue) is a secreted inhibitor of the Wnt signalling pathway and a critical modulator of tumour promotion and the tumour microenvironment. However, mechanisms regulating DKK1 expression are understudied. DNAJB6 {DnaJ [HSP40 (heat-shock protein 40 kDa)] homologue, subfamily B, member 6} is an HSP40 family member whose expression is compromised during progression of breast cancer and melanoma. Inhibition of the Wnt/beta-catenin signalling pathway by up-regulation of DKK1 is one of the key mechanisms by which DNAJB6 suppresses tumour metastasis and EMT (epithelial-mesenchymal transition). Analysis of the DKK1 promoter to define the cis-site responsible for its up-regulation by DNAJB6  revealed the presence of two binding sites for a transcriptional repressor, MSX1  (muscle segment homeobox 1). Our investigations showed that MSX1 binds the DKK1 promoter and inhibits DKK1 transcription. Interestingly, silencing DNAJB6 resulted in up-regulation of MSX1 concomitant with increased stabilization of beta-catenin. ChIP (chromatin immunoprecipitation) studies revealed that beta-catenin binds the MSX1 promoter and stabilization of beta-catenin elevates MSX1 transcription, indicating that beta-catenin works as a transcription co-activator for MSX1. Functionally, exogenous expression of MSX1 in DNAJB6-expressing cells promotes the mesenchymal phenotype by suppression of DKK1. Thus we have identified a novel regulatory mechanism of DNAJB6-mediated DKK1 transcriptional up-regulation that can influence EMT. DKK1 is a feedback regulator of beta-catenin levels and thus our studies also define an additional negative control of this beta-catenin/DKK1 feedback loop by MSX1, which may potentially contribute to excessive stabilization of beta-catenin.
100506658	Although dysregulation of tight junction (TJ) proteins is observed in epithelial  malignancy, their participation in epithelial transformation is poorly understood. Recently we demonstrated that expression of oncogenic Raf 1 in Pa4 epithelial cells disrupts TJs and induces an oncogenic phenotype by downregulating expression of the TJ protein, occludin. Here we report the mechanism by which Raf 1 regulates occludin expression. Raf 1 inhibited occludin  transcription by repressing a minimal segment of the occludin promoter in concert with upregulation of the transcriptional repressor, Slug without influencing the  well-documented transcriptional repressor, Snail. Overexpression of Slug in Pa4 cells recapitulated the effect of Raf 1 on occludin expression, and depletion of  Slug by small interfering RNA abrogated the effect of Raf 1 on occludin. Finally, chromatin immunoprecipitation assays and site-directed mutagenesis demonstrated a direct interaction between Slug and an E-box within the minimal Raf 1-responsive  segment of the occludin promoter. These findings support a role of Slug in mediating Raf 1-induced transcriptional repression of occludin and subsequent epithelial to mesenchymal transition.
1012	Overexpression of T-cadherin (T-cad) transcripts occurs in approximately 50% of human hepatocellular carcinomas (HCCs). To elucidate T-cad functions in HCC, we examined T-cad protein expression in normal and tumoral human livers and hepatoma cell lines and investigated its influence on invasive potential of HCC using RNA  interference silencing of T-cad expression in Mahlavu cells. Whereas T-cad expression was restricted to endothelial cells (EC) from large blood vessels in normal livers, it was up-regulated in sinusoidal EC from 8/15 invasive HCCs. Importantly, in three of them (38%) T-cad was detected in tumor cells within regions in which E-cadherin expression was absent. Among six hepatoma cell lines, only Mahlavu expressed T-cad but not E-cadherin. T-cad exhibited a globally punctuate distribution in quiescent Mahlavu and additionally it concentrated at the leading edge of migrating cells. Matrigel invasion assay revealed that Mahlavu possess a high invasive potential that was significantly inhibited by T-cad silencing. Wound healing and random motility assays demonstrated that inhibition of T-cad expression in Mahlavu significantly reduced their motility. We propose that T-cad expression in tumor cells might occur by cadherin-switching during epithelial-mesenchymal transition and may represent an additional mechanism contributing to HCC metastasis.
1027	Transmembrane 4L six family member 5 (TM4SF5) can regulate cell-cell adhesion and cellular morphology via cytoplasmic p27(Kip1)-mediated changes in RhoA activity.  However, how TM4SF5 causes cytosolic p27(Kip1) stabilization remains unknown. In  this study we found that TM4SF5-mediated Ser10 phosphorylation of p27(Kip1) required for cytosolic localization was not always correlated with Akt activity.  Inhibition or suppression of c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) in TM4SF5-expressing cells decreased Ser10 phosphorylation of p27(Kip1) and rescued expression levels  and localization of adherence junction molecules to cell-cell contacts. These observations suggest involvement of JNKs in TM4SF5-mediated p27(Kip1) Ser10 phosphorylation and localization during epithelial-mesenchymal transition.CI  - Copyright (c) 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.
1029	Detachment of epithelial cells from matrix or attachment to an inappropriate matrix engages an apoptotic response known as anoikis, which prevents metastasis. Cellular sensitivity to anoikis is compromised during the oncogenic epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT), through unknown mechanisms. We report here a pathway through which EMT confers anoikis resistance. NRAGE (neurotrophin  receptor-interacting melanoma antigen) interacted with a component of the E-cadherin complex, ankyrin-G, maintaining NRAGE in the cytoplasm. Oncogenic EMT  downregulated ankyrin-G, enhancing the nuclear localization of NRAGE. The oncogenic transcriptional repressor protein TBX2 interacted with NRAGE, repressing the tumor suppressor gene p14ARF. P14ARF sensitized cells to anoikis;  conversely, the TBX2/NRAGE complex protected cells against anoikis by downregulating this gene. This represents a novel pathway for the regulation of anoikis by EMT and E-cadherin.
10397	Our recent study demonstrated that higher expression of N-myc downregulated gene  1 (NDRG1) is closely correlated with poor prognosis in gastric cancer patients. In this study, we asked whether NDRG1 has pivotal roles in malignant progression  including metastasis of gastric cancer cells. By gene expression microarray analysis expression of NDRG1 showed the higher increase among a total of 3691 up-regulated genes in a highly metastatic gastric cancer cell line (58As1) than their parental low metastatic counterpart (HSC-58). The highly metastatic cell lines showed decreased expression of E-cadherin, together with enhanced expression of vimentin and Snail. This decreased expression of E-cadherin was restored by Snail knockdown in highly metastatic cell lines. We next established  stable NDRG1 knockdown cell lines (As1/Sic50 and As1/Sic54) from the highly metastatic cell line, and both of these cell lines showed enhanced expression of  E-cadherin and decreased expression of vimentin and Snail. And also, E-cadherin promoter-driven luciferase activity was found to be increased by NDRG1 knockdown  in the highly metastatic cell line. NDRG1 knockdown in gastric cancer cell showed suppressed invasion of cancer cells into surround tissues, suppressed metastasis  to the peritoneum and decreased ascites accumulation in mice with significantly improved survival rates. This is the first study to demonstrate that NDRG1 plays  its pivotal role in the malignant progression of gastric cancer through epithelial mesenchymal transition.
10413	The Hippo pathway defines a novel signaling cascade regulating cell proliferation and survival in Drosophila, which involves the negative regulation of the transcriptional coactivator Yorkie by the kinases Hippo and Warts. We have recently shown that the human ortholog of Yorkie, YAP, maps to a minimal amplification locus in mouse and human cancers, and that it mediates dramatic transforming activity in MCF10A primary mammary epithelial cells. Here, we show that LATS proteins (mammalian orthologs of Warts) interact directly with YAP in mammalian cells and that ectopic expression of LATS1, but not LATS2, effectively  suppresses the YAP phenotypes. Furthermore, shRNA-mediated knockdown of LATS1 phenocopies YAP overexpression. Because this effect can be suppressed by simultaneous YAP knockdown, it suggests that YAP is the primary target of LATS1 in mammalian cells. expression profiling of genes induced by ectopic expression of YAP or by knockdown of LATS1 reveals a subset of potential Hippo pathway targets implicated in epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition, suggesting that this  is a key feature of YAP signaling in mammalian cells.
1045	Sialyl Lewis x (sLe(x)) and sialyl Lewis a (sLe(a)) glycans are expressed on highly metastatic colon cancer cells. They promote extravasation of cancer cells  and tumor angiogenesis via interacting with E-selectin on endothelial cells. Recently, epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) has been noted as a critical phenotypic alteration in metastatic cancer cells. To address the association between sLe(x/a) expression and EMT, we assessed whether sLe(x/a) are highly expressed on colon cancer cells undergoing EMT. Treatment of HT29 and DLD-1 cells with EGF and/or basic FGF (bFGF) induced EMT and significantly increased sLe(x/a) expression resulting in enhanced E-selectin binding activity. The transcript levels of the glycosyltransferase genes ST3GAL1/3/4 and FUT3 were significantly elevated and that of FUT2 was significantly suppressed by the treatment. We provide evidence that ST3GAL1/3/4 and FUT3 are transcriptionally up-regulated by  c-Myc with probable involvement of Ser62 phosphorylation, and that FUT2 is transcriptionally down-regulated through the attenuation of CDX2. The contribution of c-Myc and CDX2 to the sLe(x/a) induction was proved to be significant by knockdown or forced expression experiments. Interestingly, the cells undergoing EMT exhibited significantly increased VEGF secretion, which can  promote tumor angiogenesis in cooperation with sLe(x/a). Finally, immunohistological study indicated high E-selectin ligand expression on cancer cells undergoing EMT in vivo, supporting their coexistence observed in vitro. These results suggest a significant link between sLe(x/a) expression and EMT in colon cancer cells and a pivotal role of c-Myc and CDX2 in regulating sLe(x/a) expression during EMT.
10454	Therapies to limit or reverse fibrosis have proven unsuccessful, highlighting the need for a greater understanding of basic mechanisms that drive fibrosis and, in  particular, the link between fibrosis and inflammation. It has been shown that pro-fibrotic transforming growth factor beta1 (TGF-beta1)-driven epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) can be accentuated by tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-alpha). TGF-beta-activated kinase 1 (TAK1) is activated by both TGF-beta1 and TNF-alpha, activating both nuclear factor kappa-light-chain-enhancer of activated B cells and mitogen-activated protein kinase signaling pathways. In this study, we evaluated the potential for TAK1 to  modulate the synergistic effect between TGF-beta1 and TNF-alpha in driving EMT. Co-stimulation with TGF-beta1 and TNF-alpha induced an accentuated and extended phosphorylation of TAK1 compared to either alone. TAK1 signaled downstream via nuclear factor kappa-light-chain-enhancer of activated B cells, and Jun N-terminal kinase-2, but independent of Jun N-terminal kinase-1, extracellular signal-regulated kinase-1/2, or p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase signaling to drive EMT in bronchial epithelial cells. Blocking either TAK1 or Jun N-terminal kinase-2 inhibited EMT. TAK1 phosphorylation was increased in the airway epithelium of patients with fibrotic airway disease. These data identify factors  leading to and affected by accentuated and extended TAK1 phosphorylations potential novel therapeutic targets in inflammation-driven fibrotic diseases.CI  - Copyright (c) 2012 American Society for Investigative Pathology. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
10516	epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a normal physiological process that regulates tissue development, remodeling and repair; however, aberrant EMT also elicits disease development in humans, including lung fibrosis, rheumatoid arthritis and cancer cell metastasis. Transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta)  is a master regulator of EMT in normal mammary epithelial cells (MECs), wherein this pleiotropic cytokine also functions as a potent suppressor of mammary tumorigenesis. In contrast, malignant MECs typically evolve resistance to TGF-beta-mediated cytostasis and develop the ability to proliferate, invade and metastasize when stimulated by TGF-beta. It therefore stands to reason that establishing how TGF-beta promotes EMT may offer new insights into targeting the  oncogenic activities of TGF-beta in human breast cancers. By monitoring alterations in the actin cytoskeleton and various markers of EMT, we show here that the TGF-beta gene target, fibulin-5 (FBLN5), initiates EMT and enhances that induced by TGF-beta. Whereas normal MECs contain few FBLN5 transcripts, those induced to undergo EMT by TGF-beta show significant upregulation of FBLN5 messenger RNA, suggesting that EMT and the dedifferentiation of MECs override the repression of FBLN5 expression in polarized MECs. We also show that FBLN5 stimulated matrix metalloproteinase expression and activity, leading to MEC invasion and EMT, to elevated Twist expression and to reduced E-cadherin expression. Finally, FBLN5 promoted anchorage-independent growth in normal and malignant MECs, as well as enhanced the growth of 4T1 tumors in mice. Taken together, these findings identify a novel EMT and tumor-promoting function for FBLN5 in developing and progressing breast cancers.
10628	BACKGROUND: Transforming growth factor beta (TGF-beta) has critical roles in regulating cell growth, differentiation, apoptosis, invasion and epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) of various cancer cells. TGF-beta-induced EMT is an important step during carcinoma progression to invasion state. Thioredoxin binding protein-2 (TBP-2, also called Txnip or VDUP1) is downregulated in various types of human cancer, and its deficiency results in the earlier onset of cancer. However, it remains unclear how TBP-2 suppresses the invasion and metastasis of cancer. PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: In this study, we demonstrated that TBP-2 deficiency increases the transcriptional activity in response to TGF-beta and also enhances TGF-beta-induced Smad2 phosphorylation levels. Knockdown of TBP-2 augmented the TGF-beta-responsive expression of Snail  and Slug, transcriptional factors related to TGF-beta-mediated induction of EMT,  and promoted TGF-beta-induced spindle-like morphology consistent with the depletion of E-Cadherin in A549 cells. CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Our results indicate that TBP-2 deficiency enhances TGF-beta signaling and promotes TGF-beta-induced EMT. The control of TGF-beta-induced EMT is critical for the inhibition of the invasion and metastasis. Thus TBP-2, as a novel regulatory molecule of TGF-beta signaling, is likely to be a prognostic indicator or a potential therapeutic target for preventing tumor progression.
10630	The expression of podoplanin, a small mucin-like protein, is upregulated in the invasive front of a number of human carcinomas. We have investigated podoplanin function in cultured human breast cancer cells, in a mouse model of pancreatic beta cell carcinogenesis, and in human cancer biopsies. Our results indicate that podoplanin promotes tumor cell invasion in vitro and in vivo. Notably, the expression and subcellular localization of epithelial markers are unaltered, and  mesenchymal markers are not induced in invasive podoplanin-expressing tumor cells. Rather, podoplanin induces collective cell migration by filopodia formation via the downregulation of the activities of small Rho family GTPases. In conclusion, podoplanin induces an alternative pathway of tumor cell invasion in the absence of epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT).
10631	AIM: To investigate the contribution of periostin in nicotine-promoted gastric cancer cell proliferation, survival, invasion, drug resistance, and epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). METHODS: Gastric cancer cells were treated with nicotine and periostin protein expression was determined by immunoblotting. Periostin mRNA in gastric cancer cells was silenced using small interfering RNA (siRNA) techniques and periostin gene expression was evaluated by quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction. Gastric cancer cells transfected with control or periostin siRNA plasmid were compared in terms  of cell proliferation using the methylthiazolyldiphenyl-tetrazolium bromide assay. Cell apoptosis was compared using annexin V-fluoresceine isothiocyanate and propidium iodine double staining. tumor invasion was determined using the Boyden chamber invasion assay, and the EMT marker Snail expression was evaluated  by immunoblotting. RESULTS: Nicotine upregulated periostin in gastric cancer cells through a COX-2 dependent pathway, which was blocked by the COX-2-specific  inhibitor NS398. Periostin mRNA expression was decreased by ~87.2% by siRNA in gastric cancer cells, and stable periostin-silenced cells were obtained by G418 screening. Periostin-silenced gastric cancer cells exhibited reduced cell proliferation, elevated sensitivity to chemotherapy with 5-fluorouracil, and decreased cell invasion and Snail expression (P < 0.05). CONCLUSION: Periostin is a nicotine target gene in gastric cancer and plays a role in gastric cancer cell  growth, invasion, drug resistance, and EMT facilitated by nicotine.
10637	Lefty is a novel member of the transforming growth factor (TGF) supergene family  which has the potential to antagonise actions of TGF-beta1 - the main factor driving fibrotic disease in the kidney and in other organs. TGF-beta1 can induce  fibrosis through several mechanisms, including epithelial-mesenchymal transition  (EMT) which contributes to myofibroblast accumulation in the renal interstitium.  This study examined whether Lefty can antagonise TGF-beta1 mediated EMT. A rat tubular epithelial cell line (NRK52E) was stably transfected with a Lefty expression plasmid (52E-Lefty) or control plasmid (52E-Control). 52E-Control cells underwent TGF-beta1 induced EMT with up-regulation of alpha-smooth muscle actin (alpha-SMA), down-regulation of E-cadherin, and transition to an elongated  fibroblast-like morphology. In contrast, 52E-Lefty cells were substantially protected from TGF-beta1 induced EMT. Analysis of signalling pathways showed that 52E-Lefty cells had a marked reduction in TGF-beta1 induced Smad activity and suppression of the secondary phase of JNK (but not p38) signalling. Treatment of  NRK52E cells with a JNK inhibitor was shown to suppress TGF-beta1 induced EMT. In conclusion, Lefty can antagonise TGF-beta1 mediated EMT in renal tubular epithelial cells. Lefty may have potential as an anti-fibrotic molecule in the treatment of renal fibrosis.CI  - Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
10657	BACKGROUND: This study was aimed at investigating the role and molecular mechanism of Sam68 in cervical cancer lymph node metastasis. MATERIALS AND METHODS: Sam68 expression profile was detected by quantitative polymerase chain reaction, western blotting and immunohistochemical staining. Short hairpin RNA interfering approach was employed to suppress endogenous Sam68 expression in cervical cancer cells to determine its role in metastasis and the possible mechanism. RESULTS: Sam68 expression in cervical cancer was significantly up-regulated at both messenger RNA and protein levels compared with that in normal cervical tissues. The high expression level of Sam68 and its cytoplasmic localization were significantly associated with risk factors including pelvic lymph node metastasis (P < 0.001), and served as independent prognostic factors for predicting shortening of the overall survival time and disease-free survival  time in patients with early-stage cervical cancer. Moreover, down-regulation of Sam68 in cervical cancer cells remarkably inhibited cellular motility and invasion. In addition, down-regulation of Sam68 reversed epithelial-mesenchymal transition through inhibiting the Akt/ GSK-3beta/Snail pathway. CONCLUSION: This  study demonstrated that Sam68 could induce cervical cancer lymph node metastasis  through regulating epithelial-mesenchymal transition, and Sam68 expression profile possessed the potential to serve as predictors of pelvic lymph node metastasis in cervical cancer patients.
10855	The epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) of proximal tubular epithelial cells  (PTECs) into myofibroblasts contributes to the establishment of fibrosis that leads to end stage renal disease. FGF-2 induces EMT in PTECs. Because the interaction between FGF-2 and its receptor is mediated by heparan sulfate (HS) and syndecans, we speculated that a deranged HS/syndecans regulation impairs FGF-2 activity. Heparanase is crucial for the correct turnover of HS/syndecans. The aim of the present study was to assess the role of heparanase on epithelial-mesenchymal transition induced by FGF-2 in renal tubular cells. In human kidney 2 (HK2) PTEC cultures, although FGF-2 induces EMT in the wild-type clone, it is ineffective in heparanase-silenced cells. The FGF-2 induced EMT is through a stable activation of PI3K/AKT which is only transient in heparanase-silenced cells. In PTECs, FGF-2 induces an autocrine loop which sustains its signal through multiple mechanisms (reduction in syndecan-1, increase in heparanase, and matrix metalloproteinase 9). Thus, heparanase is necessary for FGF-2 to produce EMT in PTECs and to sustain FGF-2 intracellular signaling. Heparanase contributes to a synergistic loop for handling syndecan-1,  facilitating FGF-2 induced-EMT. In conclusion, heparanase plays a role in the tubular-interstitial compartment favoring the FGF-2-dependent EMT of tubular cells. Hence, heparanase is an interesting pharmacological target for the prevention of renal fibrosis.
11187	Plakophilin 3 (PKP3) belongs to the p120ctn family of armadillo-related proteins  predominantly functioning in desmosome formation. Here we report that PKP3 is transcriptionally repressed by the E-cadherin repressor ZEB1 in metastatic cancer cells. ZEB1 physically associates with two conserved E-box elements in the PKP3 promoter and partially represses the activity of corresponding human and mouse PKP3 promoter fragments in reporter gene assays. In human tumours ZEB1 is upregulated in invasive cancer cells at the tumour-host interface, which is accompanied by downregulation of PKP3 expression levels. Hence, the transcriptional repression of PKP3 by ZEB1 contributes to ZEB1-mediated disintegration of intercellular adhesion and epithelial to mesenchymal transition.
11279	BACKGROUND & AIMS: The transcription factor Kruppel-like factor 8 (KLF8) has a role in tumor development, growth, and metastasis, but its role in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is not clear. METHODS: KLF8 expression in human HCC cell lines and tumor tissues was measured by quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction, immunoblot, and immunochemical analyses. The effects of KLF8 depletion  or overexpression in HCC cells were observed in cultured cells and in mice. Changes in gene expression patterns in HCC cells in which levels of KLF8 were reduced using small interfering RNA were investigated by microarray analysis. The clinical significance of KLF8 expression levels were validated using tissue microarray analysis of surgical samples from 314 HCC patients. RESULTS: KLF8 was  overexpressed in highly metastatic HCC cell lines and in samples from patients with recurrent HCC. In cultured cells, KLF8 up-regulation promoted cell proliferation and invasion; inhibited apoptosis; down-regulated N-cadherin, vimentin, and fibronectin; and up-regulated E-cadherin. In mice, overexpression of KLF8 increased HCC progression and metastasis. Microarray analysis showed that reduction of KLF8 in HCC cells down-regulated expression of multiple genes involved in tumor progression and metastasis. KLF8 expression was a significant predictor of overall survival (P = .040) and time to HCC recurrence (P = .006) and was associated with early tumor recurrence (P = .001). CONCLUSIONS: KLF8 promotes HCC cell proliferation and invasion, inhibits apoptosis, and induces the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition. KLF8 up-regulation might be used to indicate poor prognosis or early recurrence of cancer in patients who have had surgery for HCC.CI  - Copyright (c) 2010 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
117581	BACKGROUND: Adenoid cystic carcinoma (ACC) of salivary gland is characterized by  advanced local invasion and distant metastasis. Intratumoral hypoxia was reported to be associated with epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) regulators. The purpose of this study was to evaluate the relationship between hypoxia-inducible  factor (HIF)-2alpha, TWIST2, and SIP1 expression and the invasion and metastasis  in ACC of salivary gland. METHOD: In vitro we first detected the expression of HIF-2alpha, TWIST2, and SIP1 in two ACC cell lines by Western blot and real-time  RT-PCR. Then, in vivo, a retrospective investigation of 121 patients with ACC from Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, West China Hospital of Stomatology, Sichuan University between 1996 and 2005 was carried out using immunohistochemistry to analyze the association between the expression of these three factors and clinical-pathological factors of patients. RESULTS: The protein and mRNA levels of HIF-2alpha, TWIST2, and SIP1 in the high-metastasis cell line  (ACC-M) were much higher than those of the low-metastasis cell line (ACC-2). The  positive expression of HIF-2alpha, TWIST2, and SIP1 (71.07%, 42.98%, and 38.02%,  respectively) was associated with the perineural invasion, the local recurrence,  and distant metastasis of patients with ACC (P < 0.05). The patients with the positive coexpression of the three factors had a lower survival rate than those with the negative expression (P < 0.05). CONCLUSION: It is proposed that the elevated expression of HIF-2alpha, TWIST2, and SIP1 can contribute to invasion and metastasis of ACC, and there might be some correlation between the hypoxia microenvironment and EMT in ACC.CI  - (c) 2011 John Wiley & Sons A/S.
1191	Transforming growth factor (TGF)-beta plays a dual role in tumorigenesis, switching from acting as a growth inhibitory tumor suppressor early in the process, to a tumor promoter in late-stage disease. Since TGF-beta's prometastatic role may be linked to its ability to induce tumor cell epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT), we explored TGF-beta's EMT-promoting  pathways by analysing the transcriptome changes occurring in BRI-JM01 mammary tumor epithelial cells undergoing a TGF-beta-induced EMT. We found the clusterin  gene to be the most highly upregulated throughout most of the TGF-beta time course, and showed that this results in an increase of the secreted form of clusterin. By monitoring several hallmark features of EMT, we demonstrated that antibodies targeting secreted clusterin inhibit the TGF-beta-induced EMT of BRI-JM01 cells, as well as the invasive phenotype of several other breast and prostate tumor cell lines (4T1, NMuMG, MDA-MB231LM2 and PC3), without affecting the proliferation of these cells. These results indicate that secreted clusterin  is a functionally important EMT mediator that lies downstream within TGF-beta's EMT-promoting transcriptional cascade, but not within its growth-inhibitory pathways. To further investigate the role played by secreted clusterin in tumor metastasis, we assessed the effect of several anti-clusterin monoclonal antibodies in vivo using a 4T1 syngeneic mouse breast cancer model and found that these antibodies significantly reduce lung metastasis. Taken together, our results reveal a role for secreted clusterin as an important extracellular promoter of EMT, and suggest that antibodies targeting clusterin may inhibit tumor metastasis without reducing the beneficial growth inhibitory effects of TGF-beta.
1295	epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is an important mechanism of renal tubulo-interstitial fibrosis in diabetic nephropathy (DN). Inducers of EMT, among others, are transforming growth factor-beta(1) (TGF-beta(1)) as well as extracellular collagens. In renal cells of diabetic mice and in kidneys of patients with DN, the expression of collagen VIII (gene: Col8alpha1/alpha2) is enhanced and characteristic features of DN in streptozotocin (STZ)-induced diabetic Col8alpha1/alpha2 knockout-(KO) mice are attenuated compared with diabetic wild-type mice. This study aimed to investigate whether collagen type VIII may influence the induction of EMT. DN was induced in wild-type and Col8alpha1/alpha2-KO mice using the established and widely accepted low-dose STZ  model [treatment for 5 consecutive days (50 mg/kg)]. Healthy and diabetic mice were analyzed for changes in renal function and the expression of EMT-related genes and proteins. Renal morphology, fibrosis, and various EMT markers were studied in kidneys using immunohistological and molecular biological methods. Knockout of Col8alpha1/alpha2 attenuated albuminuria, extracellular matrix production, as well as fibrosis. Furthermore, the kidneys of diabetic Col8alpha1/alpha2-KO mice showed a marked reduction in interstitial myofibroblasts, and in tubular cells the inhibition of the expression of epithelial markers as well as the expression of typical mesenchymal markers was reduced. The present study demonstrates that in contrast to diabetic wild-type mice EMT-like changes were attenuated in diabetic Col8alpha1/alpha2-KO mice, which indicates that either collagen VIII may be one of the major inducers of EMT-like changes in kidneys of diabetic wild-type mice or/possibly the lack of Col8alpha1/alpha2 disrupts TGF-beta(1)-induced EMT-like changes.
1296	epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is an important mechanism of renal tubulo-interstitial fibrosis in diabetic nephropathy (DN). Inducers of EMT, among others, are transforming growth factor-beta(1) (TGF-beta(1)) as well as extracellular collagens. In renal cells of diabetic mice and in kidneys of patients with DN, the expression of collagen VIII (gene: Col8alpha1/alpha2) is enhanced and characteristic features of DN in streptozotocin (STZ)-induced diabetic Col8alpha1/alpha2 knockout-(KO) mice are attenuated compared with diabetic wild-type mice. This study aimed to investigate whether collagen type VIII may influence the induction of EMT. DN was induced in wild-type and Col8alpha1/alpha2-KO mice using the established and widely accepted low-dose STZ  model [treatment for 5 consecutive days (50 mg/kg)]. Healthy and diabetic mice were analyzed for changes in renal function and the expression of EMT-related genes and proteins. Renal morphology, fibrosis, and various EMT markers were studied in kidneys using immunohistological and molecular biological methods. Knockout of Col8alpha1/alpha2 attenuated albuminuria, extracellular matrix production, as well as fibrosis. Furthermore, the kidneys of diabetic Col8alpha1/alpha2-KO mice showed a marked reduction in interstitial myofibroblasts, and in tubular cells the inhibition of the expression of epithelial markers as well as the expression of typical mesenchymal markers was reduced. The present study demonstrates that in contrast to diabetic wild-type mice EMT-like changes were attenuated in diabetic Col8alpha1/alpha2-KO mice, which indicates that either collagen VIII may be one of the major inducers of EMT-like changes in kidneys of diabetic wild-type mice or/possibly the lack of Col8alpha1/alpha2 disrupts TGF-beta(1)-induced EMT-like changes.
1316	Kruppel-like factor 6 (KLF6) is a DNA-binding protein containing a triple zinc-fingered motif and plays a key role in the regulation of cell proliferation, differentiation, and development. More recently it has been implicated in hepatic fibrosis via its binding to the transforming growth factor (TGF)-beta control element. In the kidney, epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a major contributor to the pathogenesis of renal fibrosis, with TGF-beta1 being a key mediator of EMT. The present study aimed to determine the role of KLF6 and TGF-beta1 in EMT in proximal tubule cells. To determine the relevance in clinical disease, KLF6 was measured in kidneys of streptozotocin-induced diabetic Ren-2 rats and in cells exposed to high (30 mM) glucose. TGF-beta1 was confirmed to induce EMT by morphological change, loss of E-cadherin, and gain in vimentin expression. KLF6 mRNA expression was concomitantly measured. To determine the role of KLF6 in EMT, the above markers of EMT were determined in KLF6-silenced (small interfering RNA) and KLF6-overexpressing proximal tubule cells. KLF6 overexpression significantly promoted a phenotype consistent with EMT. High glucose induced KLF6 in proximal tubule cells (P < 0.05). This increase in KLF6 in response to high glucose was TGF-beta1 mediated. In an in vivo model of diabetic nephropathy KLF6 increased at week 8 (P < 0.05). KLF6 plays a permissive role in TGF-beta1-induced EMT in proximal tubule cells. Its upregulation in in vivo models of diabetic nephropathy suggests it as a potential therapeutic target.
1364	Twist1 is a transcription factor that is involved in epithelial-mesenchymal transition by suppressing intercellular adhesion. In this study, we aimed to determine the role of Twist1 in the regulation of claudin-4 expression and investigate its specific mechanisms and clinical implications using human esophageal carcinoma cell lines and tissues. As a result, up-regulation of Twist1 decreased both gene and protein expression levels of endogenous claudin-4 and the suppression was mediated by direct binding of Twist1 to the canonical E-box in the promoter region of claudin-4. In addition, there was a significant inverse correlation of claudin-4 with Twist1 in esophageal cancer tissues. High Twist1 and low claudin-4 expression was associated with the poorest prognosis and was more highly correlated with adverse outcome than any other subgroup with statistical significance (p=0.001). Our results indicate that Twist1 induces the  repression of claudin-4 expression during the epithelial-mesenchymal transition in esophageal carcinoma.CI  - Copyright (c) 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
142	The versatile cytokine transforming growth factor beta (TGF-beta) regulates cellular growth, differentiation, and migration during embryonic development and  adult tissue homeostasis. Activation of TGF-beta receptors leads to phosphorylation of Smad2 and Smad3, which oligomerize with Smad4 and accumulate in the nucleus where they recognize gene regulatory regions and orchestrate transcription. Termination of Smad-activated transcription involves Smad dephosphorylation, nuclear export, or ubiquitin-mediated degradation. In an unbiased proteomic screen, we identified poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase-1 (PARP-1) as a Smad-interacting partner. PARP-1 dissociates Smad complexes from DNA by ADP-ribosylating Smad3 and Smad4, which attenuates Smad-specific gene responses and TGF-beta-induced epithelial-mesenchymal transition. Thus, our results identify ADP-ribosylation of Smad proteins by PARP-1 as a key step in controlling the strength and duration of Smad-mediated transcription.CI  - Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1432	epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) of peritoneal mesothelial cells is a pathological process that occurs during peritoneal dialysis. EMT leads to peritoneal fibrosis, ultrafiltration failure and eventually to the discontinuation of therapy. Signaling pathways involved in mesothelial EMT are thus of great interest, but are mostly unknown. We used primary mesothelial cells from human omentum to analyze the role of the p38 MAPK signaling pathway in the induction of EMT. The use of specific inhibitors, a dominant-negative p38 mutant  and lentiviral silencing of p38alpha demonstrated that p38 promotes E-cadherin expression both in untreated cells and in cells co-stimulated with the EMT-inducing stimuli transforming growth factor (TGF)-beta1 and interleukin (IL)-1beta. p38 inhibition also led to disorganization and downregulation of cytokeratin filaments and zonula occludens (ZO)-1, whereas expression of vimentin was increased. Analysis of transcription factors that repress E-cadherin expression showed that p38 blockade inhibited expression of Snail1 while increasing expression of Twist. Nuclear translocation and transcriptional activity of p65 NF-kappaB, an important inducer of EMT, was increased by p38 inhibition. Moreover, p38 inhibition increased the phosphorylation of TGF-beta-activated kinase 1 (TAK1), NF-kappaB and IkappaBalpha. The effect of p38 inhibition on E-cadherin expression was rescued by modulating the TAK1-NF-kappaB  pathway. Our results demonstrate that p38 maintains E-cadherin expression by suppressing TAK1-NF-kappaB signaling, thus impeding the induction of EMT in human primary mesothelial cells. This represents a novel role of p38 as a brake or 'gatekeeper' of EMT induction by maintaining E-cadherin levels.
1445	INTRODUCTION: Transforming growth factor (TGF)-beta suppresses breast cancer formation by preventing cell cycle progression in mammary epithelial cells (MECs). During the course of mammary tumorigenesis, genetic and epigenetic changes negate the cytostatic actions of TGF-beta, thus enabling TGF-beta to promote the acquisition and development of metastatic phenotypes. The molecular mechanisms underlying this conversion of TGF-beta function remain poorly understood but may involve signaling inputs from integrins. METHODS: beta3 Integrin expression or function in MECs was manipulated by retroviral transduction of active or inactive beta3 integrins, or by transient transfection  of small interfering RNA (siRNA) against beta3 integrin. Altered proliferation, invasion, and epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) stimulated by TGF-beta in control and beta3 integrin manipulated MECs was determined. Src involvement in beta3 integrin mediated alterations in TGF-beta signaling was assessed by performing Src protein kinase assays, and by interdicting Src function pharmacologically and genetically. RESULTS: TGF-beta stimulation induced alphavbeta3 integrin expression in a manner that coincided with EMT in MECs. Introduction of siRNA against beta3 integrin blocked its induction by TGF-beta and prevented TGF-beta stimulation of EMT in MECs. beta3 integrin interacted physically with the TGF-beta receptor (TbetaR) type II, thereby enhancing TGF-beta stimulation of mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs), and of Smad2/3-mediated gene transcription in MECs. Formation of beta3 integrin:TbetaR-II complexes blocked TGF-beta mediated growth arrest and increased TGF-beta mediated invasion and EMT. Dual beta3 integrin:TbetaR-II activation induced tyrosine phosphorylation of TbetaR-II, a phosphotransferase reaction mediated by Src in vitro. Inhibiting Src activity in MECs prevented the  ability of beta3 integrin to induce TbetaR-II tyrosine phosphorylation, MAPK activation, and EMT stimulated by TGF-beta. Lastly, wild-type and D119A beta3 integrin expression enhanced and abolished, respectively, TGF-beta stimulation of invasion in human breast cancer cells. CONCLUSION: We show that beta3 integrin alters TGF-beta signaling in MECs via Src-mediated TbetaR-II tyrosine phosphorylation, which significantly enhanced the ability of TGF-beta to induce EMT and invasion. Our findings suggest that beta3 integrin interdiction strategies may represent an innovative approach to re-establishing TGF-beta mediated tumor suppression in progressing human breast cancers.
1460	Protein kinase CK2 participates in the regulation of fundamental cellular processes. Among these processes, cell polarity and cell morphology are controlled by this enzyme probably through the phosphorylation of key proteins. To further study the involvement of CK2 in these processes, we showed that in epithelial cells, the regulatory CK2beta subunit was required for LKB1-dependent  polarization and cell adhesion. Moreover, CK2beta silencing in MCF10A mammary epithelial cells triggered changes in their morphology correlated with the acquisition of mesenchymal phenotype, which were reminiscent to TGFbeta-induced epithelial-to-mesenchymal-transition (EMT). TGFbeta has emerged as a major inducer of EMT both in vitro and in vivo. We found that among the TGFbeta isoforms, TGFbeta2 expression was strongly induced in CK2beta-knockdown cells. However, the EMT phenotype induced in response to CK2beta silencing was not abolished by blocking the TGFbeta signaling pathway at TGFbeta receptor level, suggesting that alternative pathways might be involved. Given the importance of CK2 in tumorigenesis, a dysregulation of CK2beta expression might contribute to EMT induction during cancer progression.
1462	The evolution of the cancer cell into a metastatic entity is the major cause of death in patients with cancer. Activation of the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) endows invasive and metastatic properties upon cancer cells that favor successful colonization of distal target organs. The observation that in many cancers distant metastases resemble the epithelial phenotype of primary tumors has led to speculation that the disseminated tumor cells recruited to the  target organs undergo mesenchymal-to-epithelial transition (MET). However, the MET cascade has not been recapitulated in vivo, and the cellular and molecular regulators that promote MET remain unknown. In a recent report, using a model of  spontaneous breast cancer, we have shown that bone marrow-derived myeloid progenitor cells in the premetastatic lung secrete the proteoglycan versican, which induces MET of metastatic tumor cells and accelerates metastases. This review summarizes recent progress in MET research, outlines a unique paracrine cross-talk between the microenvironment and the cancer cells, which promotes tumor outgrowth in the metastatic organ, and discusses opportunities for novel antimetastatic approaches for cancer therapy.CI  - (c)2012 AACR.
1487	Carboxyl-terminal binding protein 1 (CtBP1) is a transcriptional co-repressor that represses expression of various tumor suppressor genes. In the present study, we identified miR-137 as a potential regulator of CtBP1 expression in melanoma cells. expression of miR-137 in melanoma cell lines was found to inversely correlate with CtBP1 levels. Target Scan predicted a putative site for  miR-137 within the CtBP1 3' untranslated region (3'UTR) at nt 710-716, which is highly conserved across species. To explore the mechanism of miR-137 targeting CtBP1, we performed an Argonaute 2 (Ago2)-pull down assay, and miR-137 was identified in complex with CtBP1 mRNA. miR-137 suppressed CtBP1 3' UTR luciferase-reporter activity, and this effect was lost with deletion of the putative 3' UTR target-site. Consistent with the results of the reporter assay, ectopic expression of miR-137 reduced expression levels of CtBP1. Furthermore, expression of miR-137 increased the immediate downstream effectors of CtBP1, such as E-cadherin and Bax. The human miR-137 gene is located at chromosome 1p22, which has previously been determined to be a susceptive region for melanoma. This study suggests miR-137 may act as a tumor suppressor by directly targeting CtBP1  to inhibit epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and inducing apoptosis of melanoma cells, thus illustrating a functional link between miR-137 and CtBP1 in  melanoma development.
1490	Connective tissue growth factor (CTGF=CCN2), one of six members of cysteine-rich, secreted, heparin-binding proteins with a modular structure, is recognized as an  important player in fibrogenic pathways as deduced from findings in non-hepatic tissues and emerging results from liver fibrosis. Collectively, the data show strongly increased expression in fibrosing tissues and transforming growth factor (TGF-beta)-stimulated expression in hepatocytes, biliary epithelial cells and stellate cells. Functional activity as a mediator of fibre-fibre, fibre-matrix and matrix-matrix interactions, as an enhancer of profibrogenic TGF-beta and several secondary effects owing to TGF-beta enhancement, and as a down-modulator  of the bioactivity of bone morphogenetic protein-7 has been proposed. By changing the activity ratio of TGF-beta to its antagonist bone-morphogenetic protein-7, CTGF is proposed as a fibrogenic master switch for epithelial-mesenchymal transition. Consequently, knockdown of CTGF considerably attenuates experimental  liver fibrosis. The spill-over of CTGF from the liver into the blood stream proposes this protein as a non-invasive reporter of TGF-beta bioactivity in this  organ. Indeed, CTGF-levels in sera correlate significantly with fibrogenic activity. The data suggest CTGF as a multifaceted regulatory protein in fibrosis, which offers important translational aspects for diagnosis and follow-up of hepatic fibrogenesis and as a target for therapeutic interventions. In addition,  CTGF-promoter polymorphism might be of importance as a prognostic genetic marker  to predict the progression of fibrosis.
1499	In most carcinomas, invasion of malignant cells into surrounding tissues involves their molecular reprogramming as part of an epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition  (EMT). mutation of the APC gene in most colorectal carcinomas (CRCs) contributes  to the nuclear translocation of the oncoprotein beta-catenin that upon binding to T-cell and lymphoid enhancer (TCF-LEF) factors triggers an EMT and a proinvasive  gene expression profile. A key inducer of EMT is the ZEB1 transcription factor whose expression promotes tumorigenesis and metastasis in carcinomas. As inhibitor of the epithelial phenotype, ZEB1 is never present in the epithelium of normal colon or the tumor center of CRCs where beta-catenin remains membranous. We show here that ZEB1 is expressed by epithelial cells in intestinal tumors from human patients (familial adenomatous polyposis) and mouse models (APC(Min/+)) with germline mutations of APC that result in nuclear accumulation of beta-catenin. However, ZEB1 is not expressed in the epithelium of hereditary forms of CRCs that carry wild-type APC and where beta-catenin is excluded from the nucleus (Lynch syndrome). We found that beta-catenin/TCF4 binds directly to the ZEB1 promoter and activates its transcription. Knockdown of beta-catenin and  TCF4 in APC-mutated CRC cells inhibited endogenous ZEB1, whereas forced translocation of beta-catenin to the nucleus in APC-wild-type CRC cells induced de novo expression of ZEB1. Upregulation of MT1-MMP and LAMC2 by beta-catenin/TCF4 has been linked to invasiveness in CRCs, and we show here that  both proteins are activated by ZEB1 coexpressing with it in primary colorectal tumors with mutated APC. These results set ZEB1 as an effector of beta-catenin/TCF4 signaling in EMT and tumor progression.
1500	Adherens junctions (AJs) containing epithelial cadherin (E-cad) bound to p120-catenin (p120ctn) and beta-catenin (beta-ctn) play a crucial role in regulating cell-cell adhesion. Cigarette smoke abrogates cell-cell adhesion between epithelial cells by disrupting E-cad, a hallmark of epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), yet the underlying mechanism remains unknown. We used an organotypic culture of primary human bronchial epithelial (HBE) cells treated with smoke-concentrated medium (Smk) to establish an essential role for the interaction between p120ctn and the cytoplasmic tail of MUC1 (MUC1-CT) in regulating E-cad disruption. Within the first 4 h of smoke exposure, apical MUC1-CT repositioned to the basolateral membrane of pseudo-stratified HBE cells, where it interacted with p120ctn. A time-dependent increase in MUC1-CT/p120ctn complexes occurred in conjunction with a time-dependent dissociation of p120ctn/E-cad/beta-ctn complexes, as well as the coordinated degradation of p120ctn and E-cad. Interestingly, Smk induced a similar interaction between MUC1-CT and beta-ctn, but this occurred 44 h after MUC1-CT's initial interaction with p120ctn, and well after the AJs were destroyed. Blocking MUC1-CT's interaction with p120ctn using a MUC1-CT dominant-negative peptide, PMIP, successfully abolished Smk's disruptive effects  on AJs and recovered apical-basolateral polarity of HBE cells. The MUC1-CT/p120ctn interaction was highly dependent on EGFR/Src/Jnk-mediated tyrosine phosphorylation (TyrP) of MUC1-CT. Accordingly, EGFR, Src or Jnk inhibitors (AG1478, PP2, SP600125, respectively) abrogated Smk-induced MUC1-CT-TyrP, MUC1-CT/p120ctn interaction, AJ disruption, and loss of cellular polarity. Our work identified MUC1-CT and p120ctn as important regulators of epithelial polarity and cell-cell adhesion during a smoke-induced EMT-like process. Novel therapeutics designed to inhibit MUC1-CT/p120ctn complex formation may prevent EMT in the smoker's airway.CI  - Copyright (c) 2012 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
152007	Fibrosis is the accumulation of extracellular matrix proteins and is a common end pathway in many chronic diseases. To identify novel mediators of fibrosis we used transcript profiling in a mouse model of kidney fibrosis, the COL4A3 knockout (alport) mouse. One gene that we found up-regulated in fibrotic kidney was GLIPR-2, also known as GAPR-1 and C9orf19, a member of the plant pathogenesis-related proteins family 1. We have found that GLIPR-2 protein expression is significantly increased in fibrotic kidney compared to healthy controls. Examination of the expression pattern of GLIPR-2 indicated that the protein is selectively expressed in epithelial cells. Co-staining with antibodies for alpha-smooth muscle actin expression, a marker of myofibroblasts, showed that GLIPR-2 expressing cells are closely apposed to areas of strong alpha-smooth muscle actin expression. The origin of these myofibroblasts is not known, but in  vitro studies have shown that GLIPR-2 can induce epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) in a renal epithelial cell line. We propose that increased GLIPR-2 expression in kidney contributes to development of fibrosis by increasing the pool of activated fibroblasts, possibly through the induction of EMT.
152189	The acquisition of an invasive phenotype is a critical turning point for malignant tumor cells. CMTM8, a potential tumor suppressor, is frequently down-regulated in solid tumors, and its overexpression induces tumor cell apoptosis. Here, we identify a new role for CMTM8 in regulating tumor cell migration. Reducing CMTM8 expression in HepG2 hepatocellular carcinoma cells results in the acquisition of epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) features, including a morphological change from organized epithelial sheets to scattered fibroblast-like shapes, reduction of the epithelial marker E-cadherin,  and an increased invasive and migratory ability. These phenotypic changes are mediated in large part by the ERK-MAPK pathway, as the MEK inhibitor U0126 and shRNA-mediated knockdown of ERK2 significantly reversed these phenotypes. Hepatocyte growth factor binding to the c-MET receptor is known to induce EMT in  HepG2 cells. We found that CMTM8 knockdown in HepG2 cells induced c-MET signaling and ERK activation. Inhibition of c-MET signaling with the small molecule inhibitor SU11274 or c-MET RNAi blocked the EMT-like changes following CMTM8 knockdown. CMTM8 overexpression in HepG2 cells inhibited hepatocyte growth factor-induced EMT-like morphological changes and cell motility. Down-regulation  of CMTM8 also promoted an EMT-like change in MCF-10A cells, indicating a broader  role for CMTM8 in regulating cellular transformation.
1522	The aim of this study was to characterize the oncogenic function and mechanism of Cathepsin Z (CTSZ) at 20q13.3, a frequently amplified region in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Real-time PCR were used to compare CTSZ expression between paired HCC tumor and non-tumor specimens. CTSZ gene was stably transfected into HCC line QGY-7703 cells and its role in tumorigenicity and cell motility was characterized by soft agar, wound-healing, transwell invasion and cell adhesion assay, and tumor xenograft mouse model. Western blot analysis was used to study expression of proteins associated with epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT).Upregulation of CTSZ was detected in 59/137 (43%) of primary HCCs, which was significantly associated with advanced clinical stage (P = 0.000). Functional study found that CTSZ could increase colony formation in soft agar and promote cell motility. Further study found that the metastatic effect of CTSZ was associated with its role in inducing epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) by upregulating mesenchymal markers (fibronectin and vimentin) and downregulating epithelial markers (E-cadherin and alpha-catenin). In addition, CTSZ could also upregulate proteins associated with extracellular matrix remodeling such as MMP2, MMP3 and MMP9. Taken together, our data suggested that CTSZ was a candidate oncogene within the 20q13 amplicon and it played an important role in HCC metastasis.
1523	Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) is a refractory and lethal interstitial lung  disease characterized by alveolar epithelial cells apoptosis, fibroblast proliferation and extra-cellular matrix protein deposition. EBV, localised to alveolar epithelial cells of pulmonary fibrosis patients is associated with a poor prognosis. A strategy based on microarray-differential gene expression analysis to identify molecular drivers of EBV-associated lung fibrosis was utilized. Alveolar epithelial cells were infected with EBV to identify genes whose expression was altered following TGFbeta1-mediated lytic phase. EBV lytic reactivation by TGFbeta1 drives a selective alteration in CUX1 variant (a) (NCBI  accession number NM_181552) expression, inducing activation of non-canonical Wnt  pathway mediators, implicating it in epithelial mesenchymal transition (EMT), the molecular event underpinning scar production in tissue fibrosis. The role of EBV  in EMT can be attenuated by antiviral strategies and inhibition of Wnt signaling  by using All-Trans Retinoic Acids (ATRA). Activation of non-canonical Wnt signaling pathway by EBV in epithelial cells suggests a novel mechanism of EMT via CUX1 signaling. These data present a framework for further description of the link between infectious agents and fibrosis, a significant disease burden.
1601	BACKGROUND: Metastatic tumour cells are characterised by acquisition of migratory and invasive properties; properties shared by cells, which have undergone epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT). Disabled-2 (Dab2) is a putative tumour suppressor whose expression has been shown to be downregulated in various  cancer types including breast cancer; however, its exact function in suppressing  tumour initiation or progression is unclear. METHODS: Disabled-2 isoform expression was determined by RT-PCR analysis in human normal and breast tumour samples. Using shRNA-mediated technology, Dab2 was stably downregulated in two cell model systems representing nontumourigenic human mammary epithelial cells. These cells were characterised for expression of EMT markers by RT-PCR and western blot analysis. RESULTS: Decreased expression of the p96 and p67 isoforms  of Dab2 is observed in human breast tumour samples in comparison to normal human  breast tissue. Decreased Dab2 expression in normal mammary epithelial cells leads to the appearance of a constitutive EMT phenotype. Disabled-2 downregulation leads to increased Ras/MAPK signalling, which facilitates the establishment of an autocrine transforming growth factor beta (TGFbeta) signalling loop, concomitant  with increased expression of the TGFbeta2 isoform. CONCLUSION: Loss of Dab2 expression, commonly observed in breast cancer, may facilitate TGFbeta-stimulated EMT, and therefore increase the propensity for metastasis.
1612	Death-associated protein kinase (DAPK) is a Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent serine/threonine kinase that is thought to mediate apoptosis. We have shown that  the kinase domain of DAPK is crucial for the induction of renal tubular cell apoptosis in chronic obstructive uropathy (COU) created by unilateral ureteral ligation. DAPK-mutant mice, generated by deletion of 74 amino acids from the catalytic kinase domain, were used to investigate the role of the DAPK kinase domain in renal fibrosis following COU. Interstitial collagen and alpha-smooth muscle actin (alpha-SMA) expressions in situ were compared between obstructed kidneys in wild-type and mutant mice. As a result, tubulointerstitial fibrosis, as quantified by interstitial collagen expression, was significantly augmented in mutant kidneys compared with wild-type kidneys following COU. Furthermore, deletion of the kinase domain from DAPK significantly increased the appearance of alpha-SMA-positive myofibroblasts in the renal interstitium during COU. Thus, our results suggest that the kinase domain deleted by gene targeting plays a suppressive role for the development of renal fibrosis through inhibition of the  tubular epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition in a mouse model of COU.
1655	The nuclear p68 RNA helicase (referred to as p68) is a prototypical member of the DEAD box family of RNA helicases. The protein plays a very important role in early organ development. In the present study, we characterized the tyrosine phosphorylation of p68 under platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) stimulation. We demonstrated that tyrosine phosphorylation of p68 at Y593 mediated PDGF-stimulated epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). We showed that PDGF treatment led to phosphorylation of p68 at Y593 in the cell nucleus. The Y593-phosphorylated p68 (referred to as phosphor-p68) promotes beta-catenin nuclear translocation via a Wnt-independent pathway. The phosphor-p68 facilitates beta-catenin nuclear translocation by blocking phosphorylation of beta-catenin by GSK-3beta and displacing Axin from beta-catenin. The beta-catenin nuclear translocation and subsequent interaction with the LEF/TCF was required for the EMT process. These data demonstrated a novel mechanism of phosphor-p68 in mediating the growth factor-induced EMT and uncovered a new pathway to promote beta-catenin nuclear translocation.
1748	The distal-less homeobox gene 4 (DLX4) is a member of the DLX family of homeobox  genes. Although absent from most normal adult tissues, DLX4 is widely expressed in leukemia, lung, breast, ovarian and prostate cancers. However the molecular targets, mechanisms and pathways that mediate the role of DLX4 in tumor metastasis are poorly understood. In this study, we found that DLX4 induces cancer cells to undergo epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) through TWIST. Overexpression of DLX4 increased expression of TWIST expression in cancer cell lines, resulting in increased migratory and invasive capacity. Likewise, knocking down expression of DLX4 decreased TWIST expression and the migration ability of cancer cell lines. DLX4 bound to regulatory regions of the TWIST gene. Both western blotting and immunohistochemistry staining showed that the expression of  DLX4 and TWIST are correlated in most of breast tumors. Taken together, these data from both cell models and tumor tissues demonstrate that DLX4 not only upregulates TWIST expression but also induces EMT and tumor metastasis. Altogether, we propose a new pathway in which DLX4 drives expression of TWIST to  promote EMT, cancer migration, invasion and metastasis.
177	Fibrosis of the lung is characterized by the accumulation of myofibroblasts, a key mediator in the fibrogenic reaction. Cumulative evidence indicates that epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), a process whereby epithelial cells become mesenchyme-like, is an important contributing source for the myofibroblast population. Underlying this phenotypical change is a dramatic alteration in cellular structure. The receptor for advanced glycation end-products (RAGE) has been suggested to maintain lung homeostasis by mediating cell adhesion, while the family of ezrin/radixin/moesin (ERM) proteins, on the other hand, serve as an important cross-linker between the plasma membrane and cytoskeleton. In the present investigation, we tested the hypothesis that RAGE and ERM interact and play a key role in regulating EMT-associated structural changes in alveolar epithelial cells. Exposure of A549 cells to inflammatory cytokines resulted in phosphorylation and redistribution of ERM to the cell periphery and localization  with EMT-related actin stress fibers. Simultaneously, blockade of Rho kinase (ROCK) signaling attenuated these cytokine-induced structural changes. Additionally, RAGE expression was diminished after cytokine stimulation, with release of its soluble isoform via a matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-9-dependent mechanism. Immunofluorescence microscopy and coimmunoprecipitation revealed association between ERM and RAGE under basal conditions, which was disrupted when challenged with inflammatory cytokines, as ERM in its activated state complexed with membrane-linked CD44. Dual-fluorescence immunohistochemistry of patient idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) tissues highlighted marked diminution of RAGE in fibrotic samples, together with enhanced levels of CD44 and double-positive cells for CD44 and phospho (p)ERM. These data suggest that dysregulation of the ERM-RAGE complex might be an important step in rearrangement of the actin cytoskeleton during proinflammatory cytokine-induced EMT of human alveolar epithelial cells.
182	BACKGROUND: Hypoxia-induced renal tubular cell epithelial-mesenchymal transition  (EMT) is an important event leading to renal fibrosis. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small non-coding RNA molecules that bind to their mRNA targets, thereby leading to translational repression. The role of miRNA in hypoxia-induced EMT is largely  unknown. METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: miRNA profiling was performed for the identification of differentially expressed miRNAs in HK-2 cells under normal and  low oxygen, and the results were then verified by quantitative real time RT-PCR (qRT-PCR). The function of miRNAs in hypoxia-induced renal tubular cell EMT was assessed by the transfection of specific miRNA inhibitors and mimics. Luciferase  reporter gene assays and western blot analysis were performed to validate the target genes of miR-34a. siRNA against Jagged1 was designed to investigate the role of the miR-34a-Notch pathway in hypoxia induced renal tubular cell EMT. miRNA-34a was identified as being downregulated in hypoxic renal tubular epithelial cells. Inhibition of miR-34a expression in HK-2 cells, which highly express endogenous miR-34a, promoted a mesenchymal phenotype accompanied by reduced expression of the epithelial marker Z0-1, E-cadherin and increased expression of the mesenchymal markers alpha-SMA and vimentin. Conversely, miR-34a mimics effectively prevented hypoxia-induced EMT. Transfection of miRNA-34a in HK-2 cells under hypoxia abolished hypoxia-induced expression of Notch1 and Jagged1 as well as Notch downstream signals, such as snail. Western blot analysis and luciferase reporter gene assays showed direct evidence for miR-34a targeting  Notch1 and Jagged1. siRNAs against Jagged1 or Notch1 effectively prevented miR-34a inhibitor-induced tubular epithelial cell EMT. CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE:  Our study provides evidence that the hypoxia-induced decrease of miR-34a expression could promote EMT in renal tubular epithelial cells by directly targeting Notch1 and Jagged1, and subsequently, Notch downstream signaling.
1839	We have shown that autocrine proliferation of human keratinocytes (KCs) is strongly dependent upon amphiregulin (AREG), whereas blockade of heparin-binding  EGF-like growth factor (HB-EGF) inhibits KC migration in scratch wound assays. Here we demonstrate that expression of soluble HB-EGF (sHB-EGF) or full-length transmembrane HB-EGF (proHB-EGF), but not proAREG, results in profound increases  in KC migration and invasiveness in monolayer culture. Coincident with these changes, HB-EGF significantly decreases mRNA expression of several epithelial markers including keratins 1, 5, 10, and 14 while increasing expression of markers of cellular motility including SNAI1, ZEB1, COX-2, and MMP1. Immunostaining revealed HB-EGF-induced expression of the mesenchymal protein vimentin and decreased expression of E-cadherin, as well as nuclear translocation of beta-catenin. Suggestive of a trade-off between KC motility and proliferation, overexpression of HB-EGF also reduced KC growth by >90%. We also show that HB-EGF is strongly induced in regenerating epidermis after partial-thickness wounding of human skin. Taken together, our data suggest that expression of HB-EGF in human KCs triggers a migratory and invasive phenotype with many features of epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), which may be beneficial in the context of cutaneous wound healing.
1894	Drosophila pebble (pbl) encodes a Rho-family GTP exchange factor (GEF) required for cytokinesis. The accumulation of high levels of PBL protein during interphase and the developmentally regulated expression of pbl in mesodermal tissues suggested that the primary cytokinetic mutant phenotype might be masking other roles. Using various muscle differentiation markers, we found that Even skipped (EVE) expression in the dorsal mesoderm is greatly reduced in pbl mutant embryos. EVE expression in the dorsalmost mesodermal cells is induced in response to DPP secreted by the dorsal epidermal cells. Further analysis revealed that this phenotype is likely to be a consequence of an earlier defect. pbl mutant mesodermal cells fail to undergo the normal epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and dorsal migration that follows ventral furrow formation. This phenotype  is not a secondary consequence of failed cytokinesis, as it is rescued by a mutant form of pbl that does not rescue the cytokinetic defect. In wild-type embryos, newly invaginated cells at the lateral edges of the mesoderm extend numerous protrusions. In pbl mutant embryos, however, cells appear more tightly adhered to their neighbours and extend very few protrusions. Consistent with the  dependence of the mesoderm EMT and cytokinesis on actin organisation, the GTP exchange function of the PBL RhoGEF is required for both processes. By contrast,  the N-terminal BRCT domains of PBL are required only for the cytokinetic function of PBL. These studies reveal that a novel PBL-mediated intracellular signalling pathway operates in mesodermal cells during the transition from an epithelial to  migratory mesenchymal morphology during gastrulation.
1906	Endothelin-1 (ET-1) is implicated in the pathogenesis of idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF), but the cellular mechanisms underlying the role it plays in this  disease are not well characterized. epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), which was recently demonstrated in alveolar epithelial cells (AEC), may play an important role in the pathogenesis of IPF and other forms of pulmonary fibrosis.  Whether ET-1 contributes to the induction of EMT in AEC is unknown. The aims of this study were to evaluate AEC production of ET-1 and to determine if ET-1 induces EMT in AEC. We demonstrate that ET-1 is produced at physiologically relevant levels by primary AEC and is secreted preferentially toward the basolateral surface. We also demonstrate that AEC express high levels of endothelin type A receptors (ET-A) and, to a lesser extent, type B receptors (ET-B), suggesting autocrine or paracrine function for alveolar ET-1. In addition, ET-1 induces EMT through ET-A activation. Furthermore, TGF-beta1 synthesis is increased by ET-1, ET-1 induces Smad3 phosphorylation, and ET-1-induced EMT is attenuated by a TGF-beta1-neutralizing antibody. Thus, ET-1 is an important mediator of EMT in AEC, acting through ET-A-mediated TGF-beta1 production. These findings increase our basic understanding of the role of ET-1 in pulmonary fibrosis and suggest potential roles for AEC-derived ET-1 in the pathogenesis of other alveolar epithelial-mediated lung diseases.
1909	Endothelin-1 (ET-1) is implicated in the pathogenesis of idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF), but the cellular mechanisms underlying the role it plays in this  disease are not well characterized. epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), which was recently demonstrated in alveolar epithelial cells (AEC), may play an important role in the pathogenesis of IPF and other forms of pulmonary fibrosis.  Whether ET-1 contributes to the induction of EMT in AEC is unknown. The aims of this study were to evaluate AEC production of ET-1 and to determine if ET-1 induces EMT in AEC. We demonstrate that ET-1 is produced at physiologically relevant levels by primary AEC and is secreted preferentially toward the basolateral surface. We also demonstrate that AEC express high levels of endothelin type A receptors (ET-A) and, to a lesser extent, type B receptors (ET-B), suggesting autocrine or paracrine function for alveolar ET-1. In addition, ET-1 induces EMT through ET-A activation. Furthermore, TGF-beta1 synthesis is increased by ET-1, ET-1 induces Smad3 phosphorylation, and ET-1-induced EMT is attenuated by a TGF-beta1-neutralizing antibody. Thus, ET-1 is an important mediator of EMT in AEC, acting through ET-A-mediated TGF-beta1 production. These findings increase our basic understanding of the role of ET-1 in pulmonary fibrosis and suggest potential roles for AEC-derived ET-1 in the pathogenesis of other alveolar epithelial-mediated lung diseases.
1950	Five gallbladder cancer (GBC) cell lines were examined for morphological changes  in collagen gel culture. GBh3 and HUCCT-1 cells formed tubules in response to treatment with epithelial growth factor (EGF) and hepatocyte growth factor (HGF), and showed high levels of expression of E-cadherin (ECD), and low levels of SNAIL, vimentin, transforming growth factor (TGF)-beta, and nucleostemin (NS). In contrast, the GBd15 and FU-GBC-1 cell lines treated with EGF and HGF showed a scattering phenotype, and expressed low levels of ECD and high levels of SNAIL, vimentin, TGF-beta, and NS. All cell lines expressed the EGF receptor, c-Met, EGF, and TGF-alpha, but not HGF. Transforming growth factor-beta was upregulated  by EGF. Knockdown of the EGF receptor abrogated both tubule formation and scattering, whereas KD of TGF-beta abrogated only scattering. Knockdown of EGF induced nuclear translocation of beta-catenin and Wnt-related NS induction in the scattering cell lines, but not in the tubule-forming cell lines, whereas KD of glycogen synthase kinase-3beta in the tubule-forming cell lines resulted in the nuclear translocation of beta-catenin and Wnt-related NS induction in response to EGF treatment. These results suggest that EGF enhances epithelial-mesenchymal transformation and acquisition of stemness in GBC cells with a scattering phenotype through the activity of beta-catenin. Repression of ECD in scattering GBC cells induced the release of beta-catenin from the cell adhesion complexes along the plasma membrane and its translocation to the nucleus to activate Wnt signaling, which upregulated NS.CI  - (c) 2012 Japanese cancer Association.
1956	Human non-small cell lung cancers (NSCLCs) with activating mutations in EGFR frequently respond to treatment with EGFR-targeted tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs), such as erlotinib, but responses are not durable, as tumors acquire resistance. Secondary mutations in EGFR (such as T790M) or upregulation of the MET kinase are found in over 50% of resistant tumors. Here, we report increased activation of AXL and evidence for epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in  multiple in vitro and in vivo EGFR-mutant lung cancer models with acquired resistance to erlotinib in the absence of the EGFR p.Thr790Met alteration or MET  activation. Genetic or pharmacological inhibition of AXL restored sensitivity to  erlotinib in these tumor models. Increased expression of AXL and, in some cases,  of its ligand GAS6 was found in EGFR-mutant lung cancers obtained from individuals with acquired resistance to TKIs. These data identify AXL as a promising therapeutic target whose inhibition could prevent or overcome acquired  resistance to EGFR TKIs in individuals with EGFR-mutant lung cancer.
1958	Prostate cancers that are resistant to hormone therapy are more invasive and have greater ability to spread to other organs than androgen-dependent prostate cancers. Furthermore, this type of prostate cancer is also highly resistant to current forms of chemotherapy. This study analyzed CXCL5/ENA78, which is highly expressed in androgen-independent prostate cancers, and is responsible for cell migration and epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition in two androgen-independent prostate cancer cell lines. Inducement of PC-3 and DU145 cancer progression by CXCL5/ENA78 is associated with increased Raf/MEK/ERK activation, and the upregulation of early growth response-1 (Egr-1) and Snail. Blockade of Egr-1 decreased Snail upregulation and cell migration, indicating that Egr-1 is required in CXCL5/ENA78-mediated Snail enhancement and cell migration. In addition, Egr-1 siRNA also decreased the effect of CXCL5/ENA78 on p27 inhibition, Cdk4 induction and cell proliferation, suggesting Egr-1 is also involved in CXCL5/ENA78-mediated cell growth. Moreover, blocking ERK1/2 by siRNA suppressed CXCL5/ENA78-induced Egr-1 enhancement, cell migration, and proliferation. Our study suggests that inhibition of CXCL5/ENA78-mediated ERK/Egr-1/Snail signaling  is an attractive therapeutic target for androgen-independent prostate cancer.CI  - Copyright (c) 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.
2001	The epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a complex process that occurs during organogenesis and in cancer metastasis. Despite recent progress, the molecular pathways connecting the physiological and pathological functions of EMT need to be better defined. Here we show that the transcription factor Elf5, a key regulator of mammary gland alveologenesis, controls EMT in both mammary gland development and metastasis. We uncovered this role for Elf5 through analyses of Elf5 conditional knockout animals, various in vitro and in vivo models of EMT and metastasis, an MMTV-neu transgenic model of mammary tumour progression and clinical breast cancer samples. Furthermore, we demonstrate that Elf5 suppresses  EMT by directly repressing the transcription of Snail2, a master regulator of mammary stem cells and a known inducer of EMT. These findings establish Elf5 not  only as a key cell lineage regulator during normal mammary gland development, but also as a suppressor of EMT and metastasis in breast cancer.
2022	Endoglin is an accessory receptor for TGFbeta and can associate with Alk5 or Alk2. Although prior studies indicated that endoglin and Alk5 were not directly involved in epithelial-mesenchymal transformation (EMT) in the heart, the expression pattern of endoglin prompted a re-examination. We here show that loss  of endoglin expression mediated by either antisense DNA or siRNA results in a direct perturbation of EMT and reduced expression of EMT markers including slug,  runx2, RhoA, and latrophilin-2. An examination of BrdU incorporation shows that,  while endoglin regulates proliferation at an early stage, reduced endothelial cell proliferation does not account for the loss of mesenchyme. As Alk5 interacts with endoglin, we utilized siRNA and a specific inhibitor, HTS466284 (HTS), to perturb this receptor as well. Alk5 inhibition produced similar effects to the inhibition of endoglin. There was a reduction in mesenchymal cell formation and loss of EMT marker expression similar to that seen with endoglin. Alk5 kinase inhibition produced a similar loss of EMT marker expression but showed a contrasting upregulation of the proliferation and remodeling markers, Cyclin B2 and beta-catenin. Alk5 and endoglin both mediate endothelial cell proliferation in younger explants but, by stage 16, loss of endoglin no longer alters proliferation rates. These data show that both Alk5 and endoglin are directly involved in the process of EMT, that they interact with both TGFbeta-regulated activation and invasion pathways and that the roles of these receptors change during cardiac development.
2034	BACKGROUND: Adenoid cystic carcinoma (ACC) of salivary gland is characterized by  advanced local invasion and distant metastasis. Intratumoral hypoxia was reported to be associated with epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) regulators. The purpose of this study was to evaluate the relationship between hypoxia-inducible  factor (HIF)-2alpha, TWIST2, and SIP1 expression and the invasion and metastasis  in ACC of salivary gland. METHOD: In vitro we first detected the expression of HIF-2alpha, TWIST2, and SIP1 in two ACC cell lines by Western blot and real-time  RT-PCR. Then, in vivo, a retrospective investigation of 121 patients with ACC from Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, West China Hospital of Stomatology, Sichuan University between 1996 and 2005 was carried out using immunohistochemistry to analyze the association between the expression of these three factors and clinical-pathological factors of patients. RESULTS: The protein and mRNA levels of HIF-2alpha, TWIST2, and SIP1 in the high-metastasis cell line  (ACC-M) were much higher than those of the low-metastasis cell line (ACC-2). The  positive expression of HIF-2alpha, TWIST2, and SIP1 (71.07%, 42.98%, and 38.02%,  respectively) was associated with the perineural invasion, the local recurrence,  and distant metastasis of patients with ACC (P < 0.05). The patients with the positive coexpression of the three factors had a lower survival rate than those with the negative expression (P < 0.05). CONCLUSION: It is proposed that the elevated expression of HIF-2alpha, TWIST2, and SIP1 can contribute to invasion and metastasis of ACC, and there might be some correlation between the hypoxia microenvironment and EMT in ACC.CI  - (c) 2011 John Wiley & Sons A/S.
2056	The inhibitory effects of recombinant human erythropoietin (rhEPO) were examined  against (1) the progression of renal fibrosis in mice with complete unilateral ureteral obstruction and (2) the TGF-beta1-induced epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in MDCK cells. Unilateral ureteral obstruction was induced in BALB/c mice and rhEPO (100 or 1000 U/kg, intraperitoneally, every other day) or vehicle was administered from day 3 to day 14. Immunoblotting and immunohistochemistry revealed increased expressions of TGF-beta1, alpha-smooth muscle actin (alpha-SMA), and fibronectin and decreased expression of E-cadherin  in the obstructed kidneys. In contrast, rhEPO treatment significantly attenuated  the upregulation of TGF-beta1 and alpha-SMA and the downregulation of E-cadherin. MDCK cells were treated with TGF-beta1 (5 ng/ml) for 48 h to induce EMT, and the  cells were then co-treated with TGF-beta1 and rhEPO for another 48 h. Increased expressions of alpha-SMA and vimentin and decreased expressions of zona occludens-1 and E-cadherin were observed after TGF-beta1 treatment, and these changes were markedly attenuated by rhEPO co-treatment. TGF-beta1 increased phosphorylated Smad-2 expression in MDCK cells, which was decreased by rhEPO co-treatment. In conclusion, rhEPO treatment inhibits the progression of renal fibrosis in obstructed kidney and attenuates the TGF-beta1-induced EMT. It is suggested that the renoprotective effects of rhEPO could be mediated, at least partly, by inhibition of TGF-beta1-induced EMT.
2064	ErbB2, a metastasis-promoting oncoprotein, is overexpressed in approximately 25%  of invasive/metastatic breast cancers, but in 50%-60% of noninvasive ductal carcinomas in situ (DCIS). It has been puzzling how a subset of ErbB2-overexpressing DCIS develops into invasive breast cancer (IBC). We found that co-overexpression of 14-3-3zeta in ErbB2-overexpressing DCIS conferred a higher risk of progression to IBC. ErbB2 and 14-3-3zeta overexpression, respectively, increased cell migration and decreased cell adhesion, two prerequisites of tumor cell invasion. 14-3-3zeta overexpression reduced cell adhesion by activating the TGF-beta/Smads pathway that led to ZFHX1B/SIP-1 upregulation, E-cadherin loss, and epithelial-mesenchymal transition. Importantly, patients whose breast tumors overexpressed both ErbB2 and 14-3-3zeta had higher rates of metastatic recurrence and death than those whose tumors overexpressed only one.
207	Perturbations in the adipocytokine profile, especially higher levels of leptin, are a major cause of breast tumor progression and metastasis; the underlying mechanisms, however, are not well understood. In particular, it remains elusive whether leptin is involved in epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). Here, we provide molecular evidence that leptin induces breast cancer cells to undergo a transition from epithelial to spindle-like mesenchymal morphology. Investigating  the downstream mediator(s) that may direct leptin-induced EMT, we found functional interactions between leptin, metastasis-associated protein 1 (MTA1), and Wnt1 signaling components. Leptin increases accumulation and nuclear translocation of beta-catenin leading to increased promoter recruitment. Silencing of beta-catenin or treatment with the small molecule inhibitor, ICG-001, inhibits leptin-induced EMT, invasion, and tumorsphere formation. Mechanistically, leptin stimulates phosphorylation of glycogen synthase kinase 3beta (GSK3beta) via Akt activation resulting in a substantial decrease in the formation of the GSK3beta-LKB1-Axin complex that leads to increased accumulation  of beta-catenin. Leptin treatment also increases Wnt1 expression that contributes to GSK3beta phosphorylation. Inhibition of Wnt1 abrogates leptin-stimulated GSK3beta phosphorylation. We also discovered that leptin increases the expression of an important modifier of Wnt1 signaling, MTA1, which is integral to leptin-mediated regulation of the Wnt/beta-catenin pathway as silencing of MTA1 inhibits leptin-induced Wnt1 expression, GSK3beta phosphorylation, and beta-catenin activation. Furthermore, analysis of leptin-treated breast tumors shows increased expression of Wnt1, pGSK3beta, and vimentin along with higher nuclear accumulation of beta-catenin and reduced E-cadherin expression providing  in vivo evidence for a previously unrecognized cross-talk between leptin and MTA1/Wnt signaling in epithelial-mesenchymal transition of breast cancer cells.
2077	epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a key process in cancer progression and metastasis, requiring cooperation of the epidermal growth factor/Ras with the transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta) signaling pathway in a multistep process. The molecular mechanisms by which Ras signaling contributes to EMT, however, remain elusive to a large extent. We therefore examined the transcriptional repressor Ets2-repressor factor (ERF)-a bona fide Ras-extracellular signal-regulated kinase/mitogen-activated protein kinase effector-for its ability to interfere with TGF-beta-induced EMT in mammary epithelial cells (EpH4) expressing oncogenic Ras (EpRas). ERF-overexpressing EpRas cells failed to undergo TGF-beta-induced EMT, formed three-dimensional tubular structures in collagen gels, and retained expression of epithelial markers. Transcriptome analysis indicated that TGF-beta signaling through Smads was mostly unaffected, and ERF suppressed the TGF-beta-induced EMT via Semaphorin-7a repression. Forced expression of Semaphorin-7a in ERF-overexpressing EpRas cells reestablished their ability to undergo EMT. In contrast, inhibition of Semaphorin-7a in the parental EpRas cells inhibited their ability to undergo TGF-beta-induced EMT. Our data suggest that oncogenic Ras may  play an additional role in EMT via the ERF, regulating Semaphorin-7a and providing a new interconnection between the Ras- and the TGF-beta-signaling pathways.
2099	Here, we report that lipocalin 2 (Lcn2) promotes breast cancer progression, and we identify the mechanisms underlying this function. We first found that Lcn2 levels were consistently associated with invasive breast cancer in human tissue and urine samples. To investigate the function of Lcn2 in breast cancer progression, Lcn2 was overexpressed in human breast cancer cells and was found to up-regulate mesenchymal markers, including vimentin and fibronectin, down-regulate the epithelial marker E-cadherin, and significantly increase cell motility and invasiveness. These changes in marker expression and cell motility are hallmarks of an epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT). In contrast, Lcn2 silencing in aggressive breast cancer cells inhibited cell migration and the mesenchymal phenotype. Furthermore, reduced expression of estrogen receptor (ER)  alpha and increased expression of the key EMT transcription factor Slug were observed with Lcn2 expression. Overexpression of ERalpha in Lcn2-expressing cells reversed the EMT and reduced Slug expression, suggesting that ERalpha negatively  regulates Lcn2-induced EMT. Finally, orthotopic studies demonstrated that Lcn2-expressing breast tumors displayed a poorly differentiated phenotype and showed increased local tumor invasion and lymph node metastasis. Taken together,  these in vitro, in vivo, and human studies demonstrate that Lcn2 promotes breast  cancer progression by inducing EMT through the ERalpha/Slug axis and may be a useful biomarker of breast cancer.
2118	We showed that the PEA3 transcriptional factor interacted with LKB1, a serine/threonine kinase, which is somatically mutated in lung cancer. This interaction occurred through the ETS domain of PEA3 and the kinase domain of LKB1. mutation of LKB1 in lung cancer cells stabilized PEA3. Reintroduction of wild-type (WT) LKB1 into cells induced down-regulation of PEA3 and subsequently resulted in reduced cyclooxygenase-2 RNA and protein expression, whereas germ-line and somatic LKB1 mutants were defective in this activity. LKB1 phosphorylated PEA3 and promoted its degradation through a proteasome-mediated mechanism. Cells expressing mutant LKB1 possessed greater invasive potential compared with cells expressing WT LKB1. Increased invasion of cells with mutant LKB1 was partly due to PEA3 expression, as RNA interference inhibition of PEA3 resulted in dramatic decrease of Matrigel invasion. However, forced expression of PEA3 resulted in down-regulation of epithelial markers and induction of mesenchymal markers. These results suggest that PEA3 stabilization due to LKB1 inactivation could lead to epithelial/mesenchymal transition and greater lung cancer invasion potential.
2146	BACKGROUND: Recent profile studies of microRNA (miRNA) expression have documented a deregulation of miRNA (miR-124) in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). OBJECTIVE: To determine the status of miR-124 expression and its underlying mechanisms in the pathogenesis of HCC. METHODS: The expression levels of miR-124 were first examined in HCC cell lines and tumour tissues by real-time PCR. The in vitro and  in vivo functional effect of miR-124 was examined further. A luciferase reporter  assay was conducted to confirm target associations. RESULTS: The expression levels of miR-124 were frequently reduced in HCC cells and tissues, and low-level expression of miR-124 was significantly associated with a more aggressive and/or  poor prognostic phenotype of patients with HCC (p<0.05). In HCC cell lines, stable overexpression of miR-124 was sufficient to inhibit cell motility and invasion in vitro, and suppress intrahepatic and pulmonary metastasis in vivo. In addition, ectopic overexpression of miR-124 in HCC cells inhibited epithelial-mesenchymal cell transition, formation of stress fibres, filopodia and lamellipodia. Further studies showed that miR-124 could directly target the 3'-untranslated region (3'-UTR) of both ROCK2 and EZH2 mRNAs, and suppress their  mRNA and protein expressions. These findings suggest that miR-124 plays a critical role in regulating cytoskeletal events and epithelial-mesenchymal cell transition and, ultimately, inhibits the invasive and/or metastatic potential of  HCC, probably by its direct target on ROCK2 and EZH2 genes. These results provide functional and mechanistic links between the tumour suppressor miRNA-124 and the  two oncogenes ROCK2 and EZH2 on the aggressive nature of HCC. CONCLUSION: These data highlight an important role for miR-124 in the regulation of invasion and metastasis in the molecular aetiology of HCC, and suggest a potential application of miR-124 in prognosis prediction and cancer treatment.
220001	Upregulated gene 11 (URG11), recently identified as a new HBx-upregulated gene that may activate beta-catenin and Wnt signaling, was found to be upregulated in  a human tubule cell line under low oxygen. Here, we investigated the potential role of URG11 in hypoxia-induced renal tubular epithelial-to-mesenchymal (EMT). Overexpression of URG11 in a human proximal tubule cell line (HK2) promoted a mesenchymal phenotype accompanied by reduced expression of the epithelial marker  E-cadherin and increased expression of the mesenchymal markers vimentin and alpha-SMA, while URG11 knockdown by siRNA effectively reversed hypoxia-induced EMT. URG11 promoted the expression of beta-catenin and increased its nuclear accumulation under normoxic conditions through transactivation of the beta-catenin promoter. This in turn upregulated beta-catenin/T-cell factor (TCF)  and its downstream effector genes, vimentin, and alpha-SMA. In vivo, strong expression of URG11 was observed in the tubular epithelia of 5/6-nephrectomized rats, and a Western blot analysis demonstrated a close correlation between HIF-1alpha and URG11 protein levels. Altogether, our results indicate that URG11  mediates hypoxia-induced EMT through the suppression of E-cadherin and the activation of the beta-catenin/TCF pathway.CI  - Copyright 2009 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
2246	During epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), epithelial cells are converted into isolated motile and invasive mesenchymal cells. In model systems, EMT is induced most often by the activation of tyrosine kinase receptors through signaling pathways involving translational and post-translational regulation. In  this study, we have used the NBT-II bladder carcinoma cell system to investigate  in vitro Fibroblast Growth Factor-1 (FGF-1)-induced EMT. Transcriptome analyses were performed on NBT-II cells stimulated for 2, 6, 24, and 48 h with FGF-1. As some phenotypic changes occurred around 6 h post-stimulation, a supervised analysis was designed to identify transcript variations across defined time-periods. Our results clearly indicate that immediately after FGF-1 stimulation a set of genes assigned to transcriptional regulation (e.g., jun-B and v-ets) and to EMT induction (e.g., Notch 1) is transiently up-regulated. A set of genes involved in proteolytic systems (e.g., MMP-13 and uPAR) is immediately up-regulated but subsequently maintained throughout FGF-1 stimulation. Then follows a second wave of gene expression that includes a strong but transient up-regulation of ephrin B1 and arginase I. Finally, a third group of genes is stably modulated over 48 h which consists primarily of down-regulated genes specifically associated with the EMT-based loss of the epithelial phenotype and maintenance of the mesenchymal and invasive phenotype of carcinoma cells. Using genome-wide oligoarray technology, we have identified novel expressions of  immediate, immediate-early and later EMT biomarkers that are specifically activated downstream of the FGF/FGFR pathway and which might be significant prognostic factors for tumor progression of carcinoma.
2247	The epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) of proximal tubular epithelial cells  (PTECs) into myofibroblasts contributes to the establishment of fibrosis that leads to end stage renal disease. FGF-2 induces EMT in PTECs. Because the interaction between FGF-2 and its receptor is mediated by heparan sulfate (HS) and syndecans, we speculated that a deranged HS/syndecans regulation impairs FGF-2 activity. Heparanase is crucial for the correct turnover of HS/syndecans. The aim of the present study was to assess the role of heparanase on epithelial-mesenchymal transition induced by FGF-2 in renal tubular cells. In human kidney 2 (HK2) PTEC cultures, although FGF-2 induces EMT in the wild-type clone, it is ineffective in heparanase-silenced cells. The FGF-2 induced EMT is through a stable activation of PI3K/AKT which is only transient in heparanase-silenced cells. In PTECs, FGF-2 induces an autocrine loop which sustains its signal through multiple mechanisms (reduction in syndecan-1, increase in heparanase, and matrix metalloproteinase 9). Thus, heparanase is necessary for FGF-2 to produce EMT in PTECs and to sustain FGF-2 intracellular signaling. Heparanase contributes to a synergistic loop for handling syndecan-1,  facilitating FGF-2 induced-EMT. In conclusion, heparanase plays a role in the tubular-interstitial compartment favoring the FGF-2-dependent EMT of tubular cells. Hence, heparanase is an interesting pharmacological target for the prevention of renal fibrosis.
2260	tumour invasion and metastasis is the most common cause of death from cancer. For epithelial cells to invade surrounding tissues and metastasise, an epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is required. We have demonstrated that FGFR1 expression is increased in bladder cancer and that activation of FGFR1 induces an EMT in urothelial carcinoma (UC) cell lines. Here, we created an in vitro FGFR1-inducible model of EMT, and used this model to identify regulators of urothelial EMT. FGFR1 activation promoted EMT over a period of 72 hours. Initially a rapid increase in actin stress fibres occurred, followed by an increase in cell size, altered morphology and increased migration and invasion. By using site-directed mutagenesis and small molecule inhibitors we demonstrated  that combined activation of the mitogen activated protein kinase (MAPK) and phospholipase C gamma (PLCgamma) pathways regulated this EMT. Actin stress fibre  formation was regulated by PLCgamma activation, and was also important for the increase in cell size, migration and altered morphology. MAPK activation regulated migration and E-cadherin expression, indicating that combined activation of PLCgamma and MAPK is required for a full EMT. We used expression microarrays to assess changes in gene expression downstream of these signalling cascades. COX-2 was transcriptionally upregulated by FGFR1 and caused increased intracellular prostaglandin E(2) levels, which promoted migration. In conclusion, we have demonstrated that FGFR1 activation in UC cells lines promotes EMT via coordinated activation of multiple signalling pathways and by promoting activation of prostaglandin synthesis.
2263	In epithelial cells, alternative splicing of fibroblast growth factor receptor 2  (FGFR2) transcripts leads to the expression of the FGFR2(IIIb) isoform, whereas in mesenchymal cells, the same process results in the synthesis of FGFR2(IIIc). expression of the FGFR2(IIIc) isoform during prostate tumor progression suggests  a disruption of the epithelial character of these tumors. To visualize the use of FGFR2 exon IIIc in prostate AT3 tumors in syngeneic rats, we constructed minigene constructs that report on alternative splicing. Imaging these alternative splicing decisions revealed unexpected mesenchymal-epithelial transitions in these primary tumors. These transitions were observed more frequently where tumor cells were in contact with stroma. Indeed, these transitions were frequently observed among lung micrometastases in the organ parenchyma and immediately adjacent to blood vessels. Our data suggest an unforeseen relationship between epithelial mesenchymal plasticity and malignant fitness.
2274	BACKGROUND AND AIMS: cancer invasion and metastasis may associate with the phenotype transition called epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). We aim to evaluate the impact of four-and-a-half LIM protein 2 (FHL2) on EMT and invasion of colon cancer. METHODS: The functional role of FHL2 in EMT was determined by overexpression or small interfering RNA-mediated depletion of FHL2. Mechanisms of FHL2 on expression or activity of E-cadherin and beta-catenin were assessed. RESULTS: FHL2 was highly expressed in primary and metastatic colon cancer but not in normal tissues. FHL2 was critical for cancer cell adhesion to extracellular matrix, migration and invasion. FHL2 expression was stimulated by transforming growth factor (TGF)-beta1. Moreover, FHL2 acted as a potent EMT inducer by stimulating vimentin and matrix metalloproteinase-9 expressions and causing a loss of E-cadherin, whereas those alterations of EMT markers were not affected by silencing of Smad molecules (typical TGF-beta signal mediators) in FHL2 stable transfectant cells. Therefore, FHL2 induced EMT in a TGF-beta-dependent and Smad-independent manner. FHL2 downregulated E-cadherin expression and inhibited the formation of membrane-associated E-cadherin-beta-catenin complex. FHL2 also stabilized nuclear beta-catenin, resulting in enforcement of beta-catenin transactivation activity. CONCLUSION: FHL2 is a potent EMT inducer and might be an important mediator for invasion and/or metastasis of colon cancer.
22822	epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) contributes to renal fibrosis in chronic kidney disease. Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress, a feature of many forms of kidney disease, results from the accumulation of misfolded proteins in the ER and leads to the unfolded protein response (UPR). We hypothesized that ER  stress mediates EMT in human renal proximal tubules. ER stress is induced by a variety of stressors differing in their mechanism of action, including tunicamycin, thapsigargin, and the calcineurin inhibitor cyclosporine A. These ER stressors increased the UPR markers GRP78, GRP94, and phospho-eIF2alpha in human  proximal tubular cells. Thapsigargin and cyclosporine A also increased cytosolic  Ca(2+) concentration and T cell death-associated gene 51 (TDAG51) expression, whereas tunicamycin did not. Thapsigargin was also shown to increase levels of active transforming growth factor (TGF)-beta1 in the media of cultured human proximal tubular cells. Thapsigargin induced cytoskeletal rearrangement, beta-catenin nuclear translocation, and alpha-smooth muscle actin and vinculin expression in proximal tubular cells, indicating an EMT response. Subconfluent primary human proximal tubular cells were induced to undergo EMT by TGF-beta1 treatment. In contrast, tunicamycin treatment did not produce an EMT response. Plasmid-mediated overexpression of TDAG51 resulted in cell shape change and beta-catenin nuclear translocation. These results allowed us to develop a two-hit model of ER stress-induced EMT, where Ca(2+) dysregulation-mediated TDAG51 upregulation primes the cell for mesenchymal transformation via Wnt signaling and then TGF-beta1 activation leads to a complete EMT response. Thus the release of Ca(2+) from ER stores mediates EMT in human proximal tubular epithelium via the induction of TDAG51.
22938	Transforming growth factor-beta1 (TGF-beta1) potently induces the epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) during tumoral progression. Although Sky-interacting protein (SKIP) regulates TGF-beta1-induced Smad activation, its role in the induction of cell malignance remains uncertain. We found that TGF-beta1 increases SKIP expression in PDV cells. In cells stably transfected with SKIP antisense, AS-S, Smad3 activation decreased, along with an inhibition of TGF-beta1-induced EMT, and the cells were sensitized to the TGF-beta1-dependent inhibition of proliferation. Also, AS-S cells showed a weaker migration and invasion response. Moreover, TGF-beta1-induced urokinase-type plasminogen activator expression was inhibited, concomitantly with a TGF-beta1-independent increment of the plasminogen-activator inhibitor-1 expression. Thus, these results suggest that SKIP is required for EMT and invasiveness induced by TGF-beta1 in transformed cells.CI  - Copyright (c) 2010 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
2296	The existence of microvascular invasion (MVI) formation is one of the most important risk factors predicting poor outcome in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC)  and its mechanism remains largely unknown. epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) has been suggested to be involved in many steps of the invasion-metastasis  cascade. To elucidate the possible contribution of EMT to MVI, we initially evaluated the expression of 8 EMT-related transcription factors (TFs) in HCC patients with or without MVI and found that FOXC1 expression was significantly higher in patients with MVI than those without MVI (P < 0.05). Knockdown of FOXC1 expression in HCC cells resulted in a partial conversion of their EMT progresses, mainly regulating the mesenchymal component. Ectopic expression of snail, twist or TGF-beta1 could induce expression of FOXC1, but none of the expression of snail, twist, slug or TGF-beta was consistently down-regulated in response to FOXC1 silencing, suggesting FOXC1 might operate the downstream of other EMT regulators. In addition, knockdown of FOXC1 expression led to cytoskeleton modification accompanied by decreased ability of cell proliferation, migration, and invasion. Meanwhile, some matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and VEGF-A were also simultaneously down-regulated. Together, our findings demonstrate that FOXC1 is one of candidate predictive markers of MVI, and that inhibition of FOXC1 expression can partially reverse EMT program, offering a potential molecular therapeutic target for reducing tumor metastasis in HCC patients.
2305	FoxM1 is known to play important role in the development and progression of many  malignancies including pancreatic cancer. Studies have shown that the acquisition of epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) phenotype and induction of cancer stem cell (CSC) or cancer stem-like cell phenotypes are highly inter-related, and contributes to drug resistance, tumor recurrence, and metastasis. The molecular mechanism(s) by which FoxM1 contributes to the acquisition of EMT phenotype and induction of CSC self-renewal capacity is poorly understood. Therefore, we established FoxM1 over-expressing pancreatic cancer (AsPC-1) cells, which showed  increased cell growth, clonogenicity, and cell migration. Moreover, over-expression of FoxM1 led to the acquisition of EMT phenotype by activation of mesenchymal cell markers, ZEB1, ZEB2, Snail2, E-cadherin, and vimentin, which is  consistent with increased sphere-forming (pancreatospheres) capacity and expression of CSC surface markers (CD44 and EpCAM). We also found that over-expression of FoxM1 led to decreased expression of miRNAs (let-7a, let-7b, let-7c, miR-200b, and miR-200c); however, re-expression of miR-200b inhibited the expression of ZEB1, ZEB2, vimentin as well as FoxM1, and induced the expression of E-cadherin, leading to the reversal of EMT phenotype. Finally, we found that genistein, a natural chemo-preventive agent, inhibited cell growth, clonogenicity, cell migration and invasion, EMT phenotype, and formation of pancreatospheres consistent with reduced expression of CD44 and EpCAM. These results suggest, for the first time, that FoxM1 over-expression is responsible for the acquisition of EMT and CSC phenotype, which is in part mediated through the regulation of miR-200b and these processes, could be easily attenuated by genistein.CI  - Copyright (c) 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.
23129	cancer cells often employ developmental cues for advantageous growth and metastasis. Here, we report that an axon guidance molecule, Sema3E, is highly expressed in human high-grade ovarian endometrioid carcinoma, but not low-grade or other ovarian epithelial tumors, and facilitates tumor progression. Unlike its known angiogenic activity, Sema3E acted through Plexin-D1 receptors to augment cell migratory ability and concomitant epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT). Sema3E-induced EMT in ovarian endometrioid cancer cells was dependent on nuclear localization of Snail1 through activation of phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase and ERK/MAPK. RNAi-mediated knockdown of Sema3E, Plexin-D1 or Snail1 in Sema3E-expressing tumor cells resulted in compromised cell motility, concurrent reversion of EMT and diminished nuclear localization of Snail1. By contrast, forced retention of Snail1 within the nucleus of Sema3E-negative tumor cells induced EMT and enhanced cell motility. These results show that in addition to the angiogenic effects of Sema3E on tumor vascular endothelium, an EMT strategy could be exploited by Sema3E/Plexin-D1 signaling in  tumor cells to promote cellular invasion/migration.
2321	PURPOSE: To explore the molecular mechanism of Vascular endothelial growth factor receptor-1 (VEGFR-1) in invasion and metastasis of hepatocellular carcinoma. METHODS: Reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction was performed to test expression of VEGFR-1 and its ligand VEGF-B19 in four hepatoma carcinoma cell. Fluorescent immunohistochemistry and western blotting were used to test the change of expression of E-cadherin or alpha-catenin. RESULTS: VEGF-B-treated cells exhibited a change in E-cadherin from an organized, membrane-bound structure to a disorganized state that was dispersed throughout the cytoplasm. The maximal changes in E-cadherin were observed 24 hr after treatment of cells with VEGF-B. alpha-catenin was observed to translocate to the nucleus from its usual membrane-bound location 24 hr after treatment with either VEGF-B. expression of the epithelial adhesion molecules E-cadherin was observed to decrease 48 hours after VEGF-B treatment. The nuclear expression of alpha-catenin was observed to increase 24 hr after treatment with VEGF-B. CONCLUSIONS: VEGFR-1  on tumor cells may contribute to the aggressive behavior of hepatocellular carcinoma cells by inducing epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT). Targeting VEGFR-1 and downstream mediators of EMT may provide the foundation for the development of novel therapeutic approaches for this morbid and lethal disease.
23246	Genomic amplification of regional chromosome 8q24 is a common event in human cancers. In hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), a highly aggressive malignancy that is rapidly fatal, recurrent 8q24 gains can be detected in >50% of cases. In this  study, attempts to resolve the 8q24 region by way of array comparative genomic hybridization for affected genes in HCC revealed distinctive gains of block of proliferation 1 (BOP1). Gene expression evaluation in an independent cohort of primary HCC (n = 65) revealed frequent BOP1 up-regulation in tumors compared with adjacent nontumoral liver (84.6%; P < 0.0001). Significant associations could also be drawn between increased expressions of BOP1 and advance HCC staging (P =  0.004), microvascular invasion (P = 0.006), and shorter disease-free survival of  patients (P = 0.02). Examination of expression of C-MYC, a well-known oncogene located in proximity to BOP1, in the same series of primary HCC cases did not suggest strong clinicopathologic associations. Functional investigations by small interfering RNA-mediated suppression of BOP1 in HCC cell lines indicated significant inhibition on cell invasion (P < 0.005) and migration (P < 0.05). Overexpression of BOP1 in the immortalized hepatocyte cell line L02 showed increase cellular invasiveness and cell migratory rate (P < 0.0001). In both gene knockdown and ectopic expression assays, BOP1 did not exert an effect on cell viability and proliferation. Evident regression of the epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) phenotype was readily identified in BOP1 knockdown cells, whereas up-regulation of epithelial markers (E-cadherin, cytokeratin 18, and gamma-catenin) and down-regulation of mesenchymal markers (fibronectin and vimentin) were seen. A corresponding augmentation of EMT was indicated from the ectopic expression of BOP1 in L02. In addition, BOP1 could stimulate actin stress fiber assembly and RhoA activation. CONCLUSION: Our findings underline an important role for BOP1 in HCC invasiveness and metastasis potentials through inducing EMT and promoting actin cytoskeleton remodeling.CI  - Copyright (c) 2011 American Association for the Study of Liver diseases.
2335	epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) has been shown to play a key role in embryogenesis and cancer progression. We previously found that fibronectin (FN) carrying O-GalNAc at a specific site is selectively expressed in cancer and fetal cells/tissues, and termed oncofetal FN (onfFN). Here, we show that (i) a newly-established monoclonal antibody against FN lacking the O-GalNAc, termed normalFN (norFN), is useful for isolation of onfFN, (ii) onfFN, but not norFN, can induce EMT in human lung carcinoma cells, (iii) onfFN has a synergistic effect with transforming growth factor (TGF)beta1 in EMT induction.CI  - Copyright (c) 2012 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
23385	Nicastrin is an essential component of the gamma secretase (GS) enzyme complex, required for its synthesis and recognition of substrates for proteolytic cleavage. The purpose of this study was to investigate whether nicastrin has prognostic value or potential as a therapeutic target in breast cancer (BC). The  suitability of nicastrin as a target in BC was assessed using BC tissue microarrays (TMAs) (n = 1050), and its biological role in vitro was evaluated in  BC cell lines following gene silencing. Nicastrin blocking antibodies were developed and evaluated for their suitability as potential clinical therapeutics. TMA and cell line analysis confirmed that nicastrin expression was upregulated in BC compared to normal breast cells. In TMA patient samples, high nicastrin expression was observed in 47.5% of cases and correlated with ERalpha expression, patient age, and tumor grade. In pre-defined subset analysis, high nicastrin expression predicted for worse BC specific survival in the ERalpha -ve cohort. In vitro gene silencing of nicastrin resulted in disruption of the GS complex and a  decrease in notch1 cleavage. This was sufficient to increase E-cadherin expression and its co-localization with p120 catenin at cell-cell junctions in MCF7 cells. Nicastrin silencing in invasive MDA-MB-231 cells resulted in loss of  vimentin expression and a marked reduction in both cell motility and invasion; which was concomitant with the de novo formation of cell-cell junctions characterized by the colocalization of p120 catenin and F-actin. These data indicate that nicastrin can function to maintain epithelial to mesenchymal transition during BC progression. Anti-nicastrin polyclonal and monoclonal antibodies were able to decrease notch1 and vimentin expression and reduced the invasive capacity of BC cells in vitro. This supports our hypothesis that a nicastrin blocking antibody could be used to limit metastatic dissemination in invasive BC.
23513	Scribble (Scrib), Discs large, and Lethal giant larvae form a protein complex that regulates different aspects of cell polarization, including apical-basal asymmetry in epithelial cells and anterior-posterior polarity in migrating cells. Here, we show that Scrib interacts with the intermediate filament cytoskeleton in epithelial Madin-Darby canine kidney (MDCK) cells and endothelial human umbilical vein endothelial cells. Scrib binds vimentin via its postsynaptic density 95/disc-large/zona occludens domains and in MDCK cells redistributes from filaments to the plasma membrane during the establishment of cell-cell contacts.  RNA interference-mediated silencing of Scrib, vimentin, or both in MDCK cells results in defects in the polarization of the Golgi apparatus during cell migration. Concomitantly, wound healing is delayed due to the loss of directional movement. Furthermore, cell aggregation is dependent on both Scrib and vimentin.  The similar phenotypes observed after silencing either Scrib or vimentin support  a coordinated role for the two proteins in cell migration and aggregation. Interestingly, silencing of vimentin leads to an increased proteasomal degradation of Scrib. Thus, the upregulation of vimentin expression during epithelial to mesenchymal transitions may stabilize Scrib to promote directed cell migration.
2475	In cancer progression, carcinoma cells gain invasive behavior through a loss of epithelial characteristics and acquisition of mesenchymal properties, a process that can lead to epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). TGF-beta is a potent inducer of EMT, and increased TGF-beta signaling in cancer cells is thought to drive cancer-associated EMT. Here, we examine the physiological requirement for mTOR complex 2 (mTORC2) in cells undergoing EMT. TGF-beta rapidly induces mTORC2  kinase activity in cells undergoing EMT, and controls epithelial cell progression through EMT. By regulating EMT-associated cytoskeletal changes and gene expression, mTORC2 is required for cell migration and invasion. Furthermore, inactivation of mTORC2 prevents cancer cell dissemination in vivo. Our results suggest that the mTORC2 pathway is an essential downstream branch of TGF-beta signaling, and represents a responsive target to inhibit EMT and prevent cancer cell invasion and metastasis.
25794	BACKGROUND: Oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) is one of the most common head and neck cancers. The prognosis of OSCC is usually poor because of extensive local invasion at initial diagnosis. In the literature, Fascin has been reported  responsible for cell motility and over-expression of Fascin contributes to an unfavorable clinical course. Nevertheless, the roles of Fascin protein playing in aggressiveness of OSCC and their potential mechanisms need to be elucidated. METHODS: Two cell lines of OSCC (OECM-1 and SCC-25) via the vector-based small interfering RNA (siRNA) to suppress the expression of the Fascin gene were used.  Subsequent analyses and observation regarding the expression of Fascin protein and cyto-morphological alterations were detected by Western blot and immunofluorescent microscopy. Boyden chamber invasion assay, cell migration assay and adhesion assay were also applied to investigate the functional changes of OSCC. RESULTS: There were statistically significant differences (P < 0.05) of Fascin expression before and after silencing. Down-regulation of Fascin protein directly led to changes of cell surface protrusions under immunofluorescent microscopy and resulted in suppression of migration, invasion and increase of adhesion in both cell lines (P < 0.05). Furthermore, down-regulation of Fascin expression also resulted in alterations of E-cadherin, beta-catenin and TWIST at  certain level, implicative of an association with epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that expression of Fascin protein may play an essential role in regulation of progression of OSCC and contributes to the event of EMT in the early aggressiveness of OSCC.
25800	LIV-1 is a downstream target of STAT3 and is essential for the nuclear localization of Snail, a master regulator of epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT). Little is known about the association of LIV-1 with pancreatic carcinoma development, therefore, expression of LIV-1 mRNA was analyzed by real-time reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) in 9 cultured cell lines (8 carcinoma and 1 normal duct cell lines) and 24 pancreatic tissues (12 carcinoma and 12 normal tissues). Localization of this gene product was investigated by immunohistochemistry in 72 pancreatic carcinoma and the relation  between its expression and clinicopathological findings was examined. To assess the function of LIV-1 in pancreatic carcinoma cells, stable siRNA expressing Panc-1 cells were generated. Higher expression of LIV-1 mRNA was found in both pancreatic carcinoma cell lines and pancreatic carcinoma tissues compared to normal duct cell line and histologically normal tissues, respectively. Immunohistochemical analysis revealed that LIV-1 expression was frequently found  in 76.4% of pancreatic carcinoma tissues and its expression level was associated  with tumor size and lymphatic infiltration. Down-regulated LIV-1 cells showed significant inhibition of anchorage-dependent or -independent proliferation and cell motility in vitro and reduction of tumor growth and metastasis in vivo. Furthermore, nuclear expression of Snail was decreased and E-cadherin expression  was restored in LIV-1 siRNA expressing pancreatic carcinoma cells. These findings indicate that LIV-1 may be involved in acquisition of the aggressive phenotype of human pancreatic carcinoma cells through the induction of epithelial to mesenchymal transition.
25875	BACKGROUND: Cell transdifferentiation is characterized by loss of some phenotypes along with acquisition of new phenotypes in differentiated cells. The differentiated state of a given cell is not irreversible. It depends on the up- and downregulation exerted by specific molecules. RESULTS: We report here that HCCR-1, previously shown to play an oncogenic role in human cancers, induces epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and mesenchymal-to-epithelial transition (MET) in human and mouse, respectively. The stem cell factor receptor  CD117/c-Kit was induced in this transdifferentiated (EMT) sarcoma tissues. This MET occurring in HCCR-1 transfected cells is reminiscent of the transdifferentiation process during nephrogenesis. Indeed, expression of HCCR-1 was observed during the embryonic development of the kidney. This suggests that HCCR-1 might be involved in the transdifferentiation process of cancer stem cell. CONCLUSIONS: Therefore, we propose that HCCR-1 may be a regulatory factor that stimulates morphogenesis of epithelia or mesenchyme during neoplastic transformation.
25937	The TAZ transcription co-activator has been shown to promote cell proliferation and to induce epithelial-mesenchymal transition. Recently we have demonstrated that TAZ is phosphorylated and inhibited by the Hippo tumor suppressor pathway, which is altered in human cancer. The mechanism of TAZ-mediated transcription is  unclear. We demonstrate here that TEAD is a key downstream transcription factor mediating the function of TAZ. Disruption of TEAD-TAZ binding or silencing of TEAD expression blocked the function of TAZ to promote cell proliferation and to  induce epithelial-mesenchymal transition, demonstrating TEAD as a key downstream  effector of TAZ. We also identified CTGF, a gene that regulates cell adhesion, proliferation, and migration, as a direct target of TAZ and TEAD. Our study establishes a functional partnership between TAZ and TEAD under negative regulation by the Hippo signaling pathway.
2625	GATA3, a transcription factor that regulates T lymphocyte differentiation and maturation, is exclusively expressed in early stage well differentiated breast cancers but not in advanced invasive cancers. However, little is understood regarding its activity and the mechanisms underlying this differential expression in cancers. Here, we employed GATA3-positive, non-invasive (MCF-7) and GATA3-negative, invasive (MDA-MB-231) breast cancer cells to define its role in the transformation between these two distinct phenotypes. Ectopic expression of GATA3 in MDA-MB-231 cells led to a cuboidal-like epithelial phenotype and reduced cell invasive activity. These cells also increased E-cadherin expression but decreased levels of vimentin, N-cadherin, and MMP-9. Further, MDA-MB-231 cells expressing GATA3 grew smaller primary tumors without metastasis compared with larger metastatic tumors derived from control MDA-MB-231 cells in xenografted mice. GATA3 was found to induce E-cadherin expression through binding GATA-like motifs located in the E-cadherin promoter. Blockade of GATA3 using small interfering RNA gene knockdown in MCF-7 cells triggered fibroblastic transformation and cell invasion, resulting in distant metastasis. Studies of human breast cancer showed that GATA3 expression correlated with elevated E-cadherin levels, ER expression, and long disease-free survival. These data suggest that GATA3 drives invasive breast cancer cells to undergo the reversal of epithelial-mesenchymal transition, leading to the suppression of cancer metastasis.
26585	Ingestion of aristolochic acid (AA) is associated with the development of aristolochic acid nephropathy (AAN), which is characterized by progressive tubulointerstitial fibrosis, chronic renal failure and urothelial cancer. Our previous study showed that bone morphogenetic protein-7 (BMP-7) could attenuate AA-induced epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in human proximal tubule epithelial cells (PTEC). However, how gremlin (a BMP-7 antagonist) antagonizes the BMP-7 action in PTEC remained unsolved. The aim of the current study was to investigate the role of gremlin in AA-induced EMT in PTEC (HK-2 cells). HK-2 cells were treated with AA (10 mumol/L) for periods up to 72 h. Cell viability was determined by tetrazolium dye (MTT) assay. Morphological changes were assessed by phase-contrast microscopy. Markers of EMT, including E-cadherin and alpha-smooth muscle actin (alpha-SMA) were detected by indirect immunofluorescence stains. The BMP-7 and gremlin mRNA and protein expression in HK-2 cells were analyzed by quantitative real-time PCR (real-time RT-PCR) and western blotting after exposure to AA. The level of phosphorylated Smad1/5/8, a marker of BMP-7 activity, was also determined by western blot analysis. Cells were transfected with gremlin siRNA to determine the effects of gremlin knockdown on markers of EMT following treatment with AA. Our results indicated that AA-induced EMT was associated with acquisition of fibroblast-like cell shape, loss of E-cadherin, and increases of alpha-SMA and collagen type I. Interestingly, exposure of HK-2 cells to 10 mumol/L AA increased the mRNA and protein expression of gremlin in HK-2 cells. This increase was in parallel with a decrease in BMP-7 expression and a down-regulation of phosphorylated Smad1/5/8 protein levels. Moreover, transfection with siRNA to gremlin was able to recover  BMP-7 signaling activity, and attenuate EMT-associated phenotypic changes induced by AA. Together, these observations strongly suggest that gremlin plays a critical role in the modulation of reno-protective action of BMP, and that inhibition of gremlin will be a promising means of developmenting novel treatments for AAN.CI  - Copyright (c) 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.
269	Examination of Mullerian inhibiting substance (MIS) signaling in the rat in vivo  and in vitro revealed novel developmental stage- and tissue-specific events that  contributed to a window of MIS responsiveness in Mullerian duct regression. The MIS type II receptor (MISRII)-expressing cells are initially present in the coelomic epithelium of both male and female urogenital ridges, and then migrate into the mesenchyme surrounding the male Mullerian duct under the influence of MIS. expression of the genes encoding MIS type I receptors, Alk2 and Alk3, is also spatiotemporally controlled; Alk2 expression appears earlier and increases predominantly in the coelomic epithelium, whereas Alk3 expression appears later and is restricted to the mesenchyme, suggesting sequential roles in Mullerian duct regression. MIS induces expression of Alk2, Alk3 and Smad8, but downregulates Smad5 in the urogenital ridge. Alk2-specific small interfering RNA  (siRNA) blocks both the transition of MISRII expression from the coelomic epithelium to the mesenchyme and Mullerian duct regression in organ culture. Mullerian duct regression can also be inhibited or accelerated by siRNA targeting Smad8 and Smad5, respectively. Thus, the early action of MIS is to initiate an epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition of MISRII-expressing cells and to specify the components of the receptor/SMAD signaling pathway by differentially regulating their expression.
27076	C4.4A is a glycolipid-anchored membrane protein expressed in several human malignancies. The aim of this study was to explore the association between C4.4A  expression at the invasion front of colorectal cancer (CRC) and tumor budding, a  putative hallmark of cell invasion of CRC. Advanced CRCs (T2-4, n = 126) had a budding count of 3.66 +/- 5.66, which was significantly higher than that of T1 early CRCs (1.75 +/- 2.78, n = 87). C4.4A-positive CRC specimens showed a larger  budding cell number than C4.4A-negative CRC specimens in T1 CRCs, and especially  advanced CRCs (9.45 +/- 5.83 vs 1.60 +/- 3.93). Furthermore, we found a correlation between the percentage of C4.4A-positive cases and budding count in advanced CRC. Multivariate analysis for patients' survival showed that C4.4A was  superior to tumor budding as a prognostic factor. With siRNA treatment, C4.4A levels were associated with cell invasion, but not with proliferation, in HCT116  and DLD1 cell lines. An immunohistochemical study in a subset of CRCs showed no relationship between C4.4A and Ki-67 proliferation marker. In vitro assays using  HCT116 indicated that C4.4A levels correlated well with epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) with regard to cell morphology and alterations of EMT markers including E-cadherin, vimentin, and partially N-cadherin. We also found that C4.4A expression was significantly associated with loss of E-cadherin and gain of beta-catenin in clinical CRC tissue samples. These findings suggest that a tight  association between C4.4A and tumor budding may, in part, be due to C4.4A promoting EMT at the invasive front of CRC.CI  - (c) 2012 Japanese cancer Association.
2745	Transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta) is a cytokine important in inducing epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), a crucial morphological event in a wide  range of physiological and pathological cellular processes. In this study, we demonstrate that TGF-beta1 induces the EMT phenotype through decreasing the expression of the glutaredoxin 1 (Grx1) gene, an anti-oxidant enzyme, in H-Ras transformed EpH4 mammary epithelial cells (EpRas), but not in the parental EpH4 cells. TGF-beta1-induced reduction of Grx1 expression caused an increase of intracellular reactive oxygen species (ROS) in EpRas cells, and pre-treatment of  the ROS scavenger N-acetylcysteine (NAC) inhibited TGF-beta1-induced EMT. Grx1-overexpressing EpRas cells showed a reduction in intracellular ROS generation and suppressed the expression of mesenchymal markers upon treatment of TGF-beta1. In addition, MEK/MAP kinase and phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase (PI3K) signaling were found to mediate the decrease in Grx1 expression upon TGF-beta1 treatment, depending on the presence of Ras protein. Thus our findings strongly suggest that TGF-beta1 promotes EMT by increasing intracellular ROS levels via down-regulation of the Grx1 gene in EpRas cells.CI  - Copyright 2009 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
284217	CD117-positive cells contributing to cardiac cell turnover in normal and pathological conditions have recently been described in adult human heart. Since  the precise spatial and temporal expression of extracellular matrix proteins and  their receptors is critical for organ formation, we compared the distribution of  cardiac primitive CD117-positive cells in the human adult normal and pathological hearts with ischemic cardiomyopathy, with respect to localization and expression  of laminin and integrin isoforms. In the pathological hearts, CD117-positive cells were significantly more numerous than in the normal hearts. They were localized mainly in the atria and were up to 38-fold more numerous in the subepicardium than in the myocardium. Compared with normal hearts, most CD117-positive cells in the subepicardium of pathological hearts were alpha(6) integrin-positive. Laminin-1, typical of developing heart, was found predominantly in the subepicardium of adult heart. Immunoblotting revealed its highest expression in the normal atrium and pathological left ventricle. Both laminin isoforms reduced apoptosis and increased proliferation and migration of CD117-positive cells in vitro with respect to control, but the effects of laminin-1 significantly outweighed those of laminin-2. Signaling mediated by alpha(6) integrin was implicated in the migration and protection from apoptosis,  as documented by transfection with specific small interfering RNA. These data reveal that the increase in the number of cardiac CD117-positive cells and the expression of laminin-1 are observed in ischemic cardiomyopathy. Subepicardial localization of CD117-positive cells and expression of laminin-1 and alpha(6) integrin subunits may all correspond to the activation of regeneration involving  an epithelial-mesenchymal transition recently described in adult heart.
28984	Previous studies demonstrate that response gene to complement 32 (RGC-32) mediates transforming growth factor-beta(1)-induced epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) of human renal proximal tubular cells. However, the mechanisms underlying RGC-32 function remain largely unknown. In the present study, we found that RGC-32 function in EMT is associated with Smad3. Coexpression of RGC-32 and  Smad3, but not Smad2, induces a higher mesenchymal marker alpha-smooth muscle actin (alpha-SMA) protein expression as compared with RGC-32 or Smad3 alone, while knockdown of Smad3 using short hairpin interfering RNA blocks RGC-32-induced alpha-SMA expression. These data suggest that RGC-32 interacts with Smad3, but not Smad2, in the regulation of EMT. In addition to alpha-SMA, RGC-32 and Smad3 also synergistically activate the expression of extracellular matrix protein fibronectin and downregulate the epithelial marker E-cadherin. RGC-32 colocalizes with Smad3 in the nuclei of renal proximal tubular cells. Coimmunoprecipitation assays showed that Smad3, but not Smad2, physically interacts with RGC-32 in renal proximal tubular cells. Mechanistically, RGC-32 and Smad3 coordinate the induction of EMT by regulating the EMT regulators Slug and Snail. Taken together, our data demonstrate for the first time that RGC-32 interacts with Smad3 to mediate the EMT of human renal proximal tubular cells.
290	BACKGROUND: Recently, it has been reported that a small population of cancer stem cells (CSCs) play a role in resistance to chemotherapy and radiation therapy. We  reported that CD13(+) liver CSCs survive in hypoxic lesions after chemotherapy, presumably through increased expression of CD13/Aminopeptidase N, which is a scavenger enzyme in the reactive oxygen species (ROS) metabolic pathway. On the other hand, the concept of epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) was indicated  by a recent study showing an increased plasticity linked to the cellular "stemness" of CSCs. METHODS: To study the relationship between CSCs and EMT, we examined biological characteristics of liver cancer cell lines with EMT by exposing transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta). RESULTS: We showed that a TGF-beta-induced EMT-like phenomenon is associated with increased CD13 expression in liver cancer cells. This phenomenon prevents further increases in the ROS level as well as the induction of apoptosis, promoting the survival of CD13(+) CSCs, whereas inhibition of CD13 stimulates apoptosis. Immunohistochemical analysis also indicated that after chemotherapy, CD13 was coexpressed with N-cadherin in surviving cancer cells within fibrous capsules. We have demonstrated that CD13 expression plays a role in supporting the survival of CSCs and that there is an EMT-associated reduction in ROS elevation. CONCLUSIONS: This novel and consistent linkage between functional CSC markers and the EMT phenomenon suggests a bona fide candidate for targeted therapy for EMT-mediated invasion and metastasis of liver cancer.
2902	epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) contributes to the progression of renal tubulointerstitial fibrosis. The N-methyl-d-aspartate receptor (NMDAR), which is  present in proximal tubular epithelium, is a glutamate receptor that acts as a calcium channel. Activation of NMDAR induces actin rearrangement in cells of the  central nervous system, but whether it helps maintain the epithelial phenotype of the proximal tubule is unknown. Here, knockdown of NMDAR1 in a proximal tubule cell line (HK-2) induced changes in cell morphology, reduced E-cadherin expression, and increased alpha-SMA expression. Induction of EMT with TGF-beta1 led to downregulation of both E-cadherin and membrane-associated beta-catenin, reorganization of F-actin, expression of mesenchymal markers de novo, upregulation of Snail1, and increased cell migration; co-treatment with NMDA attenuated all of these changes. Furthermore, NMDA reduced TGF-beta1-induced phosphorylation of Erk1/2 and Akt and the activation of Ras, suggesting that NMDA antagonizes TGF-beta1-induced EMT by inhibiting the Ras-MEK pathway. In the unilateral ureteral obstruction model, treatment with NMDA blunted obstruction-induced upregulation of alpha-SMA, FSP1, and collagen I and downregulation of E-cadherin. Taken together, these results suggest that NMDAR plays a critical role in preserving the normal epithelial phenotype and modulating tubular EMT.
29126	B7-H1 (CD274) is a T-cell coinhibitory molecule that is also often induced on human carcinoma cells, where its expression has been implicated in immune escape. Under inflammatory conditions, B7-H1 is also inducible in normal epithelial cells but little is known about its involvement in conversion of normal cells to tumor  cells. Here, we show that skin-specific expression of B7-H1 accelerates inflammatory carcinogenesis in a methylcholantrene (MCA)-induced model of squamous cell carcinoma (SCC). Inflammatory responses induced by MCA or phorbol ester TPA were clearly inhibited in B7-H1 transgenic mice (B7-H1tg mice). Antibody-mediated blockade of either B7-H1 or the related molecule PD-1 revealed  that their ability to limit inflammation relied on ligand interactions made by B7-H1 or PD-1. Skin keratinocytes derived from B7-H1tg mice exhibited constitutive reduction of E-cadherin, and SCC induced in B7-H1tg mice also showed loss of E-cadherin along with elevated expression of the transcription factors Slug and Twist that drive epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). Our results indicate that upregulation of B7-H1 in skin epithelial cells promotes EMT and accelerates carcinogenesis, revealing insights into the significance of B7-H1 overexpression on solid tumor cells and hinting at a close relationship between EMT and immune escape signaling pathways in cancer.CI  - (c)2010 AACR.
2931	Perturbations in the adipocytokine profile, especially higher levels of leptin, are a major cause of breast tumor progression and metastasis; the underlying mechanisms, however, are not well understood. In particular, it remains elusive whether leptin is involved in epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). Here, we provide molecular evidence that leptin induces breast cancer cells to undergo a transition from epithelial to spindle-like mesenchymal morphology. Investigating  the downstream mediator(s) that may direct leptin-induced EMT, we found functional interactions between leptin, metastasis-associated protein 1 (MTA1), and Wnt1 signaling components. Leptin increases accumulation and nuclear translocation of beta-catenin leading to increased promoter recruitment. Silencing of beta-catenin or treatment with the small molecule inhibitor, ICG-001, inhibits leptin-induced EMT, invasion, and tumorsphere formation. Mechanistically, leptin stimulates phosphorylation of glycogen synthase kinase 3beta (GSK3beta) via Akt activation resulting in a substantial decrease in the formation of the GSK3beta-LKB1-Axin complex that leads to increased accumulation  of beta-catenin. Leptin treatment also increases Wnt1 expression that contributes to GSK3beta phosphorylation. Inhibition of Wnt1 abrogates leptin-stimulated GSK3beta phosphorylation. We also discovered that leptin increases the expression of an important modifier of Wnt1 signaling, MTA1, which is integral to leptin-mediated regulation of the Wnt/beta-catenin pathway as silencing of MTA1 inhibits leptin-induced Wnt1 expression, GSK3beta phosphorylation, and beta-catenin activation. Furthermore, analysis of leptin-treated breast tumors shows increased expression of Wnt1, pGSK3beta, and vimentin along with higher nuclear accumulation of beta-catenin and reduced E-cadherin expression providing  in vivo evidence for a previously unrecognized cross-talk between leptin and MTA1/Wnt signaling in epithelial-mesenchymal transition of breast cancer cells.
2932	OBJECTIVE: To investigate the role of phosphorylation of glycogen synthase kinase-3beta (GSK-3beta) inducing epithelial mesenchymal transition in human peritoneal mesothelial cells (HPMC). METHODS: Primary HPMC was harvested from human omental tissue and maintained under defined in vitro conditions. The expression of p-GSK-3beta and total GSK-3beta in HMPC was detected by Western blot after incubation with different concentrations (0, 5, 10, 20, and 40 mmol/L)of LiCl at different time points (0, 1, 3, 6, and 12 h). The protein expression of E-cadherin and alpha-SMA was also examined after treatment with 20  mmol/L LiCl according to different time courses. The intracellular distribution and expression of alpha-SMA were determined by indirect immunofluorescence. RESULTS: LiCl stimulated phosphorylation of GSK-3beta and the effect was time-dependent and concentration-dependent to limited extent (P<0.05). The expression of alpha-SMA increased (P<0.05) and the expression of E-cadherin decreased significantly (P<0.05) after 24 h stimulation by 20 mmol/L LiCl. The indirect immunoflurescence showed that the expression of alpha-SMA in HPMC increased significantly after 24 h incubation with 20 mmol/L LiCl. CONCLUSION: The phosphorylation of GSK-3beta leads HMPC to epithelial mesenchymal transition  and provides new clue for the treatment of peritoneal fibrosis.
2934	epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) describes a process occurring during development and oncogenesis by which epithelial cells obtain fibroblast-like properties and show reduced cell adhesion and increased motility. In this report, we demonstrated typical EMT in human mammary epithelial MCF10A small interfering  (si)RNA gelsolin-knockdown cells. EMT was characterized by fibroblastic morphology, loss of contact inhibition and focus formation in monolayer growth, enhanced motility and invasiveness in vitro, increased actin filaments, overexpression of RAC, activation of both extracellular signal-regulated kinase and AKT, inactivation of glycogen synthase kinase-3, conversion of cadherin from  the E- to N-type and induction of the transcription factor Snail. These results suggested that gelsolin functions as a switch that controls E- and N-cadherin conversion via Snail, and demonstrated that its knockdown leads to EMT in human mammary epithelial cells and possibly to the development of human mammary tumors.
301	Metastasis is the major cause of carcinoma-induced death, but mechanisms involved are poorly understood. Metastasis crucially involves epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT), causing loss of epithelial polarity. Here we identify Annexin A1 (AnxA1), a protein with important functions in intracellular vesicle trafficking, as an efficient suppressor of EMT and metastasis in breast cancer. AnxA1 levels were strongly reduced in EMT of mammary epithelial cells, in metastatic murine and human cell lines and in metastatic mouse and human carcinomas. RNAi-mediated AnxA1 knockdown cooperated with oncogenic Ras to induce TGFbeta-independent EMT and metastasis in non-metastatic cells. Strikingly, forced AnxA1 expression in metastatic mouse and human mammary carcinoma cells reversed EMT and abolished metastasis. AnxA1 knockdown stimulated multiple signalling pathways but only Tyk2/Stat3 and Erk1/2 signalling were essential for  EMT.
3037	In the developing heart, the epicardium is a major source of progenitor cells that contribute to the formation of the coronary vessel system. These epicardial  progenitors give rise to the different cellular components of the coronary vasculature by undergoing a number of morphological and physiological changes collectively known as epithelial to mesenchymal transformation (EMT). However, the specific signaling mechanisms that regulate epicardial EMT are yet to be delineated. In this study we investigated the role of TGFbeta2 and hyaluronan (HA) during epicardial EMT and how signals from these two molecules are integrated during this important process. Here we show that TGFbeta2 induces MEKK3 activation, which in turn promotes ERK1/2 and ERK5 phosphorylation. TGFbeta2 also increases Has2 expression and subsequent HA production. Nevertheless, inhibition of MEKK3 kinase activity, silencing of ERK5 or pharmacological disruption of ERK1/2 activation significantly abrogates this response. Thus, TGFbeta2 promotes Has2 expression and HA production through a MEKK3/ERK1/2/5-dependent cascade. Furthermore, TGFbeta2 is able to induce epicardial cell invasion and differentiation but not proliferation. However, inhibition of MEKK3-dependent pathways, degradation of HA by hyaluronidases or blockade of CD44, significantly impairs the biological response to TGFbeta2. Taken together, these findings demonstrate that TGFbeta2 activation of MEKK3/ERK1/2/5 signaling modulates Has2 expression and HA production leading to the induction of EMT events. This is an important and novel mechanism showing how TGFbeta2 and HA signals are integrated to regulate changes in epicardial cell behavior.CI  - Published by Elsevier Inc.
3068	Hepatoma-derived growth factor (HDGF) participates in tumourigenesis but its role in breast cancer is unclear. We set out to elucidate the expression profile and function of HDGF during breast carcinogenesis. Immunoblot and immunohistochemical studies revealed elevated HDGF expression in human breast cancer cell lines and tissues. Nuclear HDGF labelling index was positively correlated with tumour grade, stage and proliferation index, but negatively correlated with survival rate in breast cancer patients. HDGF over-expression was associated with lymph node metastasis and represented an independent prognostic factor for tumour recurrence. Gene transfer studies were performed to elucidate the influence of cellular HDGF level on the malignant behaviour and epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) of breast cancer cells. Adenovirus-mediated HDGF over-expression stimulated the invasiveness and colony formation of MCF-7 cells. Moreover, HDGF over-expression promoted breast cancer cell EMT by E-cadherin down-regulation and vimentin up-regulation. Conversely, HDGF knockdown by RNA interference in MDA-MB-231 cells attenuated the malignant behaviour and elicited EMT reversal by  enhancing E-cadherin expression while depleting vimentin expression. Because HDGF is a secreted protein, we evaluated the cellular function of recombinant HDGF and found that exogenously supplied HDGF enhanced the invasiveness of breast cancer cells by down-regulating E-cadherin and up-regulating vimentin at transcriptional and translational levels. In contrast, blockade of HDGF secretion with an HDGF antibody inhibited the malignant behaviours and EMT. Finally, exogenous HDGF partially reversed benzyl isothiocyanate (BITC)-induced EMT suppression. HDGF over-expression may exert a prognostic role for tumour metastasis and recurrence  in breast cancer by modulating EMT. Copyright (c) 2012 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.CI  - Copyright (c) 2012 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
3082	Numb is an endocytic adaptor protein that regulates internalization and post-endocytic trafficking of cell surface proteins. In polarized epithelial cells Numb is localized to the basolateral membrane, and recent work has implicated Numb in regulation of cell adhesion and migration, suggesting a role for Numb in epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). We depleted MDCK cells of Numb and examined the effects downstream of EMT-promoting stimuli. While knockdown of Numb did not affect apicobasal polarity, we show that depletion of Numb destabilizes E-cadherin-based cell-cell adhesion and promotes loss of epithelial cell morphology. In addition, Numb knockdown in MDCK cells potentiates HGF-induced lamellipodia formation and cell dispersal. Examination of Rac1-GTP levels in Numb knockdown cells revealed hyperactivation of Rac1 following extracellular calcium depletion and HGF stimulation, which corresponds with enhanced loss of cell adhesions and lamellipodia formation. Furthermore, inhibition of Rac1 in Numb depleted cells stabilized cell-cell contacts following depletion of extracellular calcium. Together, these data indicate that Numb acts  to suppress Rac1-GTP accumulation, and its loss leads to increased sensitivity toward extracellular signals that disrupt cell-cell adhesion to induce epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and cell dispersal.CI  - Copyright A(c) 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
3091	cancer stem cells (CSCs) are predicted to be critical drivers of tumor progression due to their "stemness", but the molecular mechanism of CSCs in regulating metastasis remains to be elucidated. epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF)-1alpha, and miR-21, all of which contribute to cell migration for metastasis, are interrelated with CSCs. In the present study, third-sphere forming (3-S) CSC-like cells, which showed elevated CSC surface markers (ALDH1(+) and CD44(+)/CD24(-/low)) and sphereforming capacity as  well as migration and invasion capacities, were cultured and isolated from breast cancer MCF-7 parental cells, to evaluate the role of miR-21 in regulating the CSC-like cell biological features, especially EMT. EMT, which was assessed by overexpression of mesenchymal cell markers (N-cadherin, Vimentin, alpha-smooth muscle actin [alpha-SMA]) and suppression of epithelial cell marker (E-cadherin), was induced in 3-S CSC-like cells. Moreover, both of HIF-1alpha and miR-21 were upregulated in the CSC-like cells. Interestingly, antagonism of miR-21 by antagomir led to reversal of EMT, downexpression of HIF-1alpha, as well as suppression of invasion and migration, which indicates a key role of miR-21 involved in regulate CSC-associated features. In conclusion, we demonstrated that the formation of CSC-like cells undergoing process of EMT-like associated with overexpression of HIF-1alpha, both of which are regulated by miR-21.CI  - (c) 2012 Japanese cancer Association.
3146	BACKGROUND: high-mobility group box protein 1 (HMGB-1) is a chromatin-binding protein that bends DNA, thereby facilitating gene transcription. HMGB-1 has also  been observed as an extracellular secreted protein in serum of patients with sepsis and has putative intracellular signalling effects regulating the production of interleukin-1 and tumour necrosis factor in a number of inflammatory conditions. METHODS: we established a model of immune-mediated epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in human proximal tubular epithelial cells (PTECs). PTECs were cultured with conditioned medium containing supernatant from activated peripheral blood mononuclear cells (aPBMCs). The model was characterized using phenotypic and transcriptomic approaches and suppression subtractive hybridisation was performed to identify differentially regulated genes. RESULTS: activation of PBMCs resulted in increased secretion of HMGB-1. In addition, treatment of PTECs with aPBMC-conditioned medium resulted in significant upregulation of HMGB-1 in PTECs. Direct treatment of PTECs with recombinant human HMGB-1 induced alterations in epithelial morphology consistent  with EMT including reduced E-cadherin expression, increased alpha-smooth muscle actin expression and enhanced cell migration. HMGB-1 effects were mediated at least in part by the receptor for advanced glycation end products and through induction of transforming growth factor-beta(1) secretion from PTECs. CONCLUSIONS: these results suggest that HMGB-1 is a key mediator of immune-mediated EMT of PTECs and a potentially important signalling molecule in the development of renal fibrosis.CI  - 2010 S. Karger AG, Basel.
3149	Deciphering molecular mechanisms that control epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) contributes to our understanding of how tumor cells become invasive and competent for intravasation. We have established that transforming growth factor beta activates Smad proteins, which induce expression of the embryonic factor high mobility group A2 (HMGA2), which causes mesenchymal transition. HMGA2 associates with Smad complexes and induces expression of an established regulator of EMT, the zinc finger transcription factor Snail. We now  show that HMGA2 can also induce expression of a second regulator of EMT, the basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor Twist. Silencing of endogenous Twist  demonstrated that this protein acts in a partially redundant manner together with Snail. Double silencing of Snail and Twist reverts mesenchymal HMGA2-expressing cells to a more epithelial phenotype when compared with single silencing of Snail or Twist. Furthermore, HMGA2 can directly associate with A:T-rich sequences and promote transcription from the Twist promoter. The new evidence proposes a model  whereby HMGA2 directly induces multiple transcriptional regulators of the EMT program and, thus, is a potential biomarker for carcinomas displaying EMT during  progression to more advanced stages of malignancy.
3162	Induction of heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1) is associated with potential antifibrogenic  effects. The effects of HO-1 expression on epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), which plays a critical role in the development of renal fibrosis, are unknown. In this study, HO-1(-/-) mice demonstrated significantly more fibrosis after 7 d of unilateral ureteral obstruction compared with wild-type mice, despite similar degrees of hydronephrosis. The obstructed kidneys of HO-1(-/-) mice also had greater macrophage infiltration and renal tubular TGF-beta1 expression than wild-type mice. In addition, the degree of EMT was more extensive in obstructed HO-1(-/-) kidneys, as assessed by alpha-smooth muscle actin and expression of S100A4 in proximal tubular epithelial cells. In vitro studies using proximal tubular cells isolated from HO-1(-/-) and wild-type kidneys confirmed these observations. In conclusion, HO-1 deficiency is associated with increased fibrosis, tubular TGF-beta1 expression, inflammation, and enhanced EMT in obstructive kidney disease. Modulation of the HO-1 pathway may provide a new therapeutic approach to progressive renal diseases.
3169	epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is implicated in various pathological processes within the prostate, including benign prostate hyperplasia (BPH) and prostate cancer progression. However, an ordered sequence of signaling events initiating carcinoma-associated EMT has not been established. In a model of transforming growth factor beta (TGFbeta)-induced prostatic EMT, SLUG is the dominant regulator of EMT initiation in vitro and in vivo, as demonstrated by the inhibition of EMT following Slug depletion. In contrast, SNAIL depletion was significantly less rate limiting. TGFbeta-stimulated KLF4 degradation is required for SLUG induction. expression of a degradation-resistant KLF4 mutant inhibited EMT, and furthermore, depletion of Klf4 was sufficient to initiate SLUG-dependent EMT. We show that KLF4 and another epithelial determinant, FOXA1, are direct transcriptional inhibitors of SLUG expression in mouse and human prostate cancer  cells. Furthermore, self-reinforcing regulatory loops for SLUG-KLF4 and SLUG-FOXA1 lead to SLUG-dependent binding of polycomb repressive complexes to the Klf4 and Foxa1 promoters, silencing transcription and consolidating mesenchymal commitment. Analysis of tissue arrays demonstrated decreased KLF4 and increased SLUG expression in advanced-stage primary prostate cancer, substantiating the involvement of the EMT signaling events described in model systems.
3172	During kidney development, the metanephric mesenchyme (MM) develops into the nephron through mesenchymal-epithelial transition (MET). We have previously reported that knock-down of the expression of hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 alpha (Hnf4a) gene induces failure of cellular organization in the condensed mesenchyme (CM) of cultured embryonic kidneys. To elucidate the details of MET during nephrogenesis, embryonic mouse kidneys were analyzed by electron microscopy, immunohistochemistry, and molecular biology. The findings showed that the intercellular junction, but not the basal lamina, was present in the CM. Additionally, immediately after Hnf4a gene expression, the expression of epithelial genes (Krt8, Tjp1, and Cdh1) increased, and those of mesenchymal genes (Acta1 and Vim) decreased, in the CM compared to the MM. To clarify the relationship between MET and Hnf4alpha, the fibroblast cell line with forced expression of Hnf4alpha protein were analyzed. In this model, it was noted that Hnf4alpha induced increasing epithelial and decreasing mesenchymal gene expression. In these, up-regulation of Pvrl1, -2, and Mllt4 genes which mediate the formation of apico-basal polarity, were found. These results, and those of previous findings, indicate that Hnf4alpha protein is associated with the initiation of MET in early nephrogenesis.
3206	Homeobox genes encode transcription factors that control cell differentiation and play essential roles in developmental patterning. Increasing evidence indicates that many homeobox genes are aberrantly expressed in cancers, and that their deregulation significantly contributes to tumor progression. The homeobox gene HOXA10 controls uterine organogenesis during embryonic development and functional endometrial differentiation in the adult. We investigated whether HOXA10 expression is deregulated in endometrial carcinomas, and how counteracting this aberrant expression modifies tumor behavior. We found that down-regulation of HOXA10 expression in endometrial carcinomas strongly correlates with increased tumor grade and is associated with methylation of the HOXA10 promoter. Enforced expression of HOXA10 in endometrial carcinoma cells inhibited invasive behavior in vitro and tumor dissemination in nude mice. The inhibitory effect of HOXA10 on invasive behavior was attributable at least in part to the ability of HOXA10 to induce expression of the epithelial cell adhesion molecule E-cadherin by down-regulating expression of Snail, a repressor of E-cadherin gene transcription. These findings reveal a novel role for HOXA10 deregulation in the  progression of endometrial carcinoma by promoting epithelial-mesenchymal transition.
3217	epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is increasingly recognized as a mechanism whereby cells in primary noninvasive tumors acquire properties essential for migration and invasion. Microarray analyses of microdissected epithelial cells from bone metastasis revealed a HOXB7 overexpression that was 3-fold higher than  in primary breast carcinomas and 18-fold higher compared with normal breast. This led us to investigate the role of HOXB7 in neoplastic transformation of breast cells. expression of HOXB7 in both MCF10A and Madin-Darby canine kidney (MDCK) epithelial cells resulted in the acquisition of both phenotypic and molecular attributes typical of EMT. Loss of epithelial proteins, claudin 1 and claudin 7,  mislocalization of claudin 4 and E-cadherin, and the expression of mesenchymal proteins, vimentin and alpha-smooth muscle actin, were observed. MDCK cells expressing HOXB7 exhibited properties of migration and invasion. Unlike MDCK vector-transfected cells, MDCK-HOXB7 cells formed highly vascularized tumors in mice. MDCK-HOXB7 cells overexpressed basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF), had more active forms of both Ras and RhoA proteins, and displayed higher levels of phosphorylation of p44 and p42 mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK; extracellular signal-regulated kinases 1 and 2). Effects initiated by HOXB7 were  reversed by specific inhibitors of FGF receptor and the Ras-MAPK pathways. These  data provide support for a function for HOXB7 in promoting tumor invasion through activation of Ras/Rho pathway by up-regulating bFGF, a known transcriptional target of HOXB7. Reversal of these effects by HOXB7-specific siRNA further suggested that these effects were mediated by HOXB7. Thus, HOXB7 overexpression caused EMT in epithelial cells, accompanied by acquisition of aggressive properties of tumorigenicity, migration, and invasion.
3219	Homeobox 9 (HOXB9), a nontransforming transcription factor overexpressed in breast cancer, alters tumor cell fate and promotes tumor progression and metastasis. Here we show that HOXB9 confers resistance to ionizing radiation by promoting DNA damage response. In nonirradiated cells, HOXB9 induces spontaneous  DNA damage, phosphorylated histone 2AX and p53 binding protein 1 foci, and increases baseline ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM) phosphorylation. Upon ionizing radiation, ATM is hyperactivated in HOXB9-expressing cells during the early stages of the double-stranded DNA break (DSB) response, accelerating accumulation of phosphorylated histone 2AX, mediator of DNA-damage checkpoint 1,  and p53 binding protein 1, at DSBs and enhances DSB repair. The effect of HOXB9 on the response to ionizing radiation requires the baseline ATM activity before irradiation and epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition induced by TGF-beta, a HOXB9 transcriptional target. Our results reveal the impact of a HOXB9-TGF-beta-ATM axis on checkpoint activation and DNA repair, suggesting that TGF-beta may be a key factor that links tumor microenvironment, tumor cell fate, DNA damage response, and radioresistance in a subset of HOXB9-overexpressing breast tumors.
3248	Breast cancer is the most frequent cancer and the leading cause of cancer-related deaths in women worldwide. The prognosis of breast cancer is tightly correlated with the degree of spread beyond the primary tumour. Arachidonic acid (AA) and prostaglandin E(2) (PGE(2)) are known to regulate tumour metastasis enabling epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). However, the detailed role of 15-hydroxyprostaglandin dehydrogenase (HPGD), the key enzyme degrading prostaglandin E(2) , remains unclear in breast cancer. Here, we show that HPGD mRNA is overexpressed in a subset of clinical breast cancers compared to normal breast tissue samples and that high HPGD mRNA expression associates with poor prognosis. Immunohistochemical staining of primary breast cancer and lymph node metastasis tissue samples confirmed high HPGD protein expression in 20% of the samples, as well as associated HPGD expression with aggressive characteristics, such as increased risk of disease relapse and shorter disease-free survival. Results from cultured cells indicated abundant HPGD expression in highly metastatic breast cancer cells, and impairment of HPGD expression using RNA interference led to a significant decrease in transforming growth factor-beta signalling, in cellular arachidonic acid levels as well as in cell migration. Furthermore, gene expression microarray analysis followed by quantitative RT-PCR  validation showed that HPGD silencing decreased aryl hydrocarbon receptor signalling and induced mesenchymal-epithelial transition. In conclusion, our results indicate that HPGD is highly expressed in metastatic and aggressive breast cancer and promotes EMT and migration in breast cancer cells.CI  - Copyright (c) 2012 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
3265	BACKGROUND: Colorectal cancer is a common disease that involves genetic alterations, such as inactivation of tumour suppressor genes and activation of oncogenes. Among them are RAS and BRAF mutations, which rarely coexist in the same tumour. Individual members of the Rho (Ras homology) GTPases contribute with distinct roles in tumour cell morphology, invasion and metastasis. The aim of this study is to dissect cell migration and invasion pathways that are utilised by BRAFV600E as compared to KRASG12V and HRASG12V oncoproteins. In particular, the role of RhoA (Ras homolog gene family, member A), Rac1 (Ras-related C3 botulinum toxin substrate 1) and Cdc42 (cell division cycle 42) in cancer progression induced by each of the three oncogenes is described. METHODS: Colon adenocarcinoma cells with endogenous as well as ectopically expressed or silenced oncogenic mutations of BRAFV600E, KRASG12V and HRASG12V were employed. Signalling pathways and Rho GTPases were inhibited with specific kinase inhibitors and siRNAs. Cell motility and invasion properties were correlated with cytoskeletal properties and Rho GTPase activities. RESULTS: Evidence presented here indicate that BRAFV600E significantly induces cell migration and invasion properties in vitro in colon cancer cells, at least in part through activation of RhoA GTPase.  The relationship established between BRAFV600E and RhoA activation is mediated by the MEK-ERK pathway. In parallel, KRASG12V enhances the ability of colon adenocarcinoma cells Caco-2 to migrate and invade through filopodia formation and PI3K-dependent Cdc42 activation. Ultimately increased cell migration and invasion, mediated by Rac1, along with the mesenchymal morphology obtained through the epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) were the main characteristics rendered by HRASG12V in Caco-2 cells. Moreover, BRAF and KRAS oncogenes are shown to cooperate with the TGFbeta-1 pathway to provide cells with additional transforming properties. CONCLUSION: This study discriminates oncogene-specific cell migration and invasion pathways mediated by Rho GTPases in colon cancer cells and reveals potential new oncogene-specific characteristics for targeted therapeutics.
329	epithelial mesenchymal transition (EMT) has been implicated in neoplastic invasion and metastasis. We have previously generated six cell lines from human gingival mucosal keratinocytes immortalized by E6/E7 of human papillomavirus type 16. Ldk and NuB1 lines represented EMT phenotype and other four lines represented cobblestone non-EMT phenotype. These cell lines were utilized as model cells to determine whether inhibitors of apoptosis proteins and cell-cycle regulators were molecular players during EMT. EMT cells exhibited increased expression of vimentin, vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) receptor1 and the ability to  form tubules on Matrigel as well as to grow anchorage independently. We found that EMT cells expressed significantly elevated levels of cIAP-1, Bclx and p27(kip) higher than non-EMT cells. These proteins could therefore be used as intrinsic indicators of EMT of human gingival keratinocytes.
3308	Smad2 and Smad3, the intracellular mediators of transforming growth factor beta (TGF-beta) signaling, are directly phosphorylated by the activated type I receptor kinase, and then shuttle from the cytoplasm into the nucleus to regulate target gene expression. Here, we report that the 70-kDa heat-shock protein (HSP70) interacts with Smad2 and decreases TGF-beta signal transduction. Ectopic  expression of HSP70 prevents receptor-dependent phosphorylation and nuclear translocation of Smad2, and blocks TGF-beta-induced epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in HaCat cells. Our findings reveal an essential role of HSP70 in TGF-beta-induced epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) by impeding Smad2 phosphorylation.CI  - Copyright (c) 2011. Published by Elsevier Ltd.
3315	INTRODUCTION: Heat shock proteins (HSPs) are normally induced under environmental stress to serve as chaperones for maintenance of correct protein folding but they are often overexpressed in many cancers, including breast cancer. The expression  of Hsp27, an ATP-independent small HSP, is associated with cell migration and drug resistance of breast cancer cells. Breast cancer stem cells (BCSCs) have been identified as a subpopulation of breast cancer cells with markers of CD24-CD44+ or high intracellular aldehyde dehydrogenase activity (ALDH+) and proved to be associated with radiation resistance and metastasis. However, the involvement of Hsp27 in the maintenance of BCSC is largely unknown. METHODS: Mitogen-activated protein kinase antibody array and Western blot were used to discover the expression of Hsp27 and its phosphorylation in ALDH + BCSCs. To study the involvement of Hsp27 in BCSC biology, siRNA mediated gene silencing and quercetin treatment were used to inhibit Hsp27 expression and the characters of BCSCs, which include ALDH+ population, mammosphere formation and cell migration,  were analyzed simultaneously. The tumorigenicity of breast cancer cells after knockdown of Hsp27 was analyzed by xenograftment assay in NOD/SCID mice. The epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) of breast cancer cells was analyzed by wound-healing assay and Western blot of snail, vimentin and E-cadherin expression. The activation of nuclear factor kappa B (NF-kappaB) was analyzed by  luciferase-based reporter assay and nuclear translocation. RESULTS: Hsp27 and its phosphorylation were increased in ALDH+ BCSCs in comparison with ALDH- non-BCSCs. Knockdown of Hsp27 in breast cancer cells decreased characters of BCSCs, such as  ALDH+ population, mammosphere formation and cell migration. In addition, the in vivo CSC frequency could be diminished in Hsp27 knockdown breast cancer cells. The inhibitory effects could also be observed in cells treated with quercetin, a  plant flavonoid inhibitor of Hsp27, and it could be reversed by overexpression of Hsp27. Knockdown of Hsp27 also suppressed EMT signatures, such as decreasing the  expression of snail and vimentin and increasing the expression of E-cadherin. Furthermore, knockdown of Hsp27 decreased the nuclear translocation as well as the activity of NF-kappaB in ALDH + BCSCs, which resulted from increasing expression of IkappaBalpha. Restored activation of NF-kappaB by knockdown of IkappaBalpha could reverse the inhibitory effect of Hsp27 siRNA in suppression of ALDH+ cells. CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest that Hsp27 regulates the EMT process and NF-kappaB activity to contribute the maintenance of BCSCs. Targeting Hsp27 may be considered as a novel strategy in breast cancer therapy.
3316	INTRODUCTION: Heat shock proteins (HSPs) are normally induced under environmental stress to serve as chaperones for maintenance of correct protein folding but they are often overexpressed in many cancers, including breast cancer. The expression  of Hsp27, an ATP-independent small HSP, is associated with cell migration and drug resistance of breast cancer cells. Breast cancer stem cells (BCSCs) have been identified as a subpopulation of breast cancer cells with markers of CD24-CD44+ or high intracellular aldehyde dehydrogenase activity (ALDH+) and proved to be associated with radiation resistance and metastasis. However, the involvement of Hsp27 in the maintenance of BCSC is largely unknown. METHODS: Mitogen-activated protein kinase antibody array and Western blot were used to discover the expression of Hsp27 and its phosphorylation in ALDH + BCSCs. To study the involvement of Hsp27 in BCSC biology, siRNA mediated gene silencing and quercetin treatment were used to inhibit Hsp27 expression and the characters of BCSCs, which include ALDH+ population, mammosphere formation and cell migration,  were analyzed simultaneously. The tumorigenicity of breast cancer cells after knockdown of Hsp27 was analyzed by xenograftment assay in NOD/SCID mice. The epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) of breast cancer cells was analyzed by wound-healing assay and Western blot of snail, vimentin and E-cadherin expression. The activation of nuclear factor kappa B (NF-kappaB) was analyzed by  luciferase-based reporter assay and nuclear translocation. RESULTS: Hsp27 and its phosphorylation were increased in ALDH+ BCSCs in comparison with ALDH- non-BCSCs. Knockdown of Hsp27 in breast cancer cells decreased characters of BCSCs, such as  ALDH+ population, mammosphere formation and cell migration. In addition, the in vivo CSC frequency could be diminished in Hsp27 knockdown breast cancer cells. The inhibitory effects could also be observed in cells treated with quercetin, a  plant flavonoid inhibitor of Hsp27, and it could be reversed by overexpression of Hsp27. Knockdown of Hsp27 also suppressed EMT signatures, such as decreasing the  expression of snail and vimentin and increasing the expression of E-cadherin. Furthermore, knockdown of Hsp27 decreased the nuclear translocation as well as the activity of NF-kappaB in ALDH + BCSCs, which resulted from increasing expression of IkappaBalpha. Restored activation of NF-kappaB by knockdown of IkappaBalpha could reverse the inhibitory effect of Hsp27 siRNA in suppression of ALDH+ cells. CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest that Hsp27 regulates the EMT process and NF-kappaB activity to contribute the maintenance of BCSCs. Targeting Hsp27 may be considered as a novel strategy in breast cancer therapy.
3320	PURPOSE: This study investigates the effects of heat shock treatment and the role of Hsp70 and Hsp90 on tranforming growth factor beta 2 (TGF-beta2)-induced epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in rat lens epithelial explants. METHODS: Rat lens epithelial explants from 7 to 10 day-old Wistar rats were dissected and incubated for 24 h before treatment. The explants were divided into eight treatment groups: control (culture medium), fibroblast growth factor-2 (FGF-2), TGF-beta2, and TGF-beta2+FGF-2 under normal culture conditions and heat  shocked conditions. The explants were heat shocked at 45 degrees C before treatment with the respective media. H&E; staining was performed on whole-mount epithelial explants from each group. Immunofluorescence staining for alpha-smooth muscle actin (alpha-SMA), F-actin, and E-cadherin was also used to determine EMT  and fibrotic plaque formation in the lens epithelial explants. Apoptotic cell death was determined using the TUNEL (terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase mediated dUTP nick end labeling) assay. Confocal microscopy was used to visualize immunoreactivity in the whole-mount epithelial explants. Western blot analysis of alpha-SMA, E-cadherin, Hsp70, and Hsp90 were also performed. RESULTS: TGF-beta2-induced EMT and plaque formation in the lens epithelial explants. The simultaneous treatment of epithelial explants with TGF-beta2+FGF-2-induced the most significant morphological changes and EMT. Heat shock treatment of lens epithelial explants before TGF-beta2 treatment did not inhibit plaque formation,  but there was significant reduction of alpha-SMA expression and greater E-cadherin expression when compared to the non-heat shocked TGF-beta2-treated explants. Interestingly, TGF-beta-induced apoptotic cell death was significantly  lower in the heat shocked explants compared to the non-heat shock lens explants.  Heat-induced accumulation of Hsp70 and Hsp90 expression was reduced in the heat shocked groups at day 4 of treatment. CONCLUSIONS: TGF-beta2-induced EMT was significantly reduced in the heat shocked TGF-beta2 lens epithelial explants. After four days of culture, there is a reduction in expression of Hsp70 and Hsp90 in the heat-shocked groups, indicating that the lens epithelial cells are under a less stressful condition than the non-heat shocked groups. In conclusion, molecular chaperones can play a protective role against TGF-beta2-induced EMT and enhance cell survival.
3371	PURPOSE: To investigate the role of tenascin-C in epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) of the lens epithelium during wound healing in mice. Tenascin-C  is a component of the extracellular matrix in patients having post-operative capsular opacification. METHODS: The crystalline lens was injured by needle puncture in tenascin-C null (KO, n=56) and wild-type (WT, n=56) mice in a C57BL/6 background. The animals were killed at day 2, 5, or 10 post-injury. Immunohistochemistry was employed to detect alpha-smooth muscle actin (alphaSMA), a marker of EMT, collagen type I, transforming growth factor beta1 (TGFbeta1), phospho-Smad2, phospho-adducin, and phospho-myosin light chain 9 (MLC9). The expression levels of phospho-adducin and phospho-MLC9 were used as markers for the activation of protein kinase C and Rho kinase, respectively. RESULTS: The expression of tenascin-C was upregulated in WT lens epithelial cells adjacent to  the capsular break at day 5. The results showed that injury-induced EMT of the mouse lens epithelium, as evaluated by histology and the expression patterns of alphaSMA and fibronectin, was attenuated in the absence of tenascin-C. Upregulation of TGFbeta1 expression in the epithelium was also inhibited, and loss of tenascin-C attenuated the phosphorylation of Smad2 and adducin in epithelial cells adjacent to the capsular break. The expression of phospho-adducin was suppressed, while the expression level of phospho-MLC9 was unchanged, in the healing epithelium in the absence of tenascin C. CONCLUSIONS: Tenascin-C is required for injury-induced EMT in the mouse lens epithelium. The mechanism behind this might involve impaired activation of cytoplasmic signaling  cascades; i.e., TGFbeta/Smad and protein kinase C-adducing signaling, in the absence of tenascin-C.
3397	Id1 (inhibitor of differentiation 1) is a member of the bHLH protein family. Consistent with its role in promoting proliferation and inhibiting differentiation, Id1 expression is low or negligible in normal prostate epithelial cells but is high in prostate cancer. Ectopic expression of Id1 in normal prostate epithelial cells could therefore provide a model for understanding early events involved in initiation of prostate cancer. Over-expression of Id1 immortalized but did not transform ventral prostate epithelial cells (Id1-RPE). Immortalization was associated with decreased Cdkn2a, Cdkn1a, androgen receptor and increased Tert expression. Gene expression profiling over successive doublings was used to identify transcriptomic changes involved during immortalization (Tieg, Jun, alpha actin, Klf10, Id2) and in maintaining the immortalized phenotype (Igfbp3, Igfbp5, Mmp2, Tgfb3). Network analysis indicated that Id1 promotes cancer/tumor morphology, cell cycle and epithelial to mesenchymal transition by influencing AP1, tnf, tgfbeta, PdgfBB and estradiol pathways. During immortalization, the expression of majority of differentially expressed genes reduced over progressive doublings suggesting a decline in transcriptional regulatory mechanisms. The associated molecular/gene expression profile of Id1-RPE cells provides an opportunity to understand the molecular pathways associated with prostate epithelial cell survival and proliferation.
3398	OBJECTIVE: To examine the relationship between effect of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) on epithelial-myofibroblast transition (EMT) of HK-2 cells and changes in expressions of bone morphogenetic protein-7 (BMP-7) and inhibitor  of DNA binding/differentiation (Id) 2, Id3. METHODS: The cultured HK-2 cells were co-treated with transforming growth factor-beta1 (TGF-beta1) (5 ng/ml) and VEGF165 (0.1, 1, 10, 100 ng/ml), or with TGF-beta1 (5 ng/ml) and VEGF receptor-1  neutralized antibody (10 microg/ ml), and were also co-treated with TGF-beta1 (5  ng/ml) and VEGF165 (100 ng/ml) with or without activin receptor-like kinase 6 (Alk6)/Fc Chimera (2 microg/ml, to neutralize endogenous BMP-7) for 48 hours. mRNA and protein expressions of alpha-smooth muscle actin (alpha-SMA), E-cadherin, BMP-7, Id2 and Id3 of HK-2 cells were assessed with double-stain immunocytochemistry, real-time PCR and Western blot respectively. RESULTS: Compared with normal controls, alpha-SMA expression significantly increased, while E-cadherin, BMP-7, Id2, and Id3 mRNA and protein expressions markedly decreased in HK-2 cells treated with TGF-beta1 (5 ng/ml) (P < 0.05). VEGF165 interrupted TGF-beta1 induced alpha-SMA expression in a dose-dependent manner and upregulated BMP-7, Id2 mRNA and protein expressions of the cells (P < 0.05). alpha-SMA expression increased, while E-cadherin, BMP-7, and Id2 expressions decreased further in HK-2 cells co-treated with TGF-beta1 and VEGFR1 antibody compared with normal controls (P < 0.05). When endogenous BMP-7 was neutralized with Alk6/Fc Chimera in the cells co-treated with TGF-beta1 and VEGF165, alpha-SMA expression upregulated (P < 0.05), while Id2 was not changed. CONCLUSIONS: VEGF165 may partially inhibit TGF-beta1-induced EMT of HK-2 cells in vitro. This effect is related to the upregulated expressions of BMP-7 and Id2. Id2 may be upregulated directly by VEGF165, but not related to BMP-7.
3417	mutations in the genes encoding isocitrate dehydrogenase 1 and 2 (IDH1/2) occur in a variety of tumor types, resulting in production of the proposed oncometabolite, 2-hydroxyglutarate (2-HG). How mutant IDH and 2-HG alter signaling pathways to promote cancer, however, remains unclear. Additionally, there exist relatively few cell lines with IDH mutations. To examine the effect of endogenous IDH mutations and 2-HG, we created a panel of isogenic epithelial cell lines with either wild-type IDH1/2 or clinically relevant IDH1/2 mutations.  Differences were noted in the ability of IDH mutations to cause robust 2-HG accumulation. IDH1/2 mutants that produce high levels of 2-HG cause an epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT)-like phenotype, characterized by changes  in EMT-related gene expression and cellular morphology. 2-HG is sufficient to recapitulate aspects of this phenotype in the absence of an IDH mutation. In the  cells types examined, mutant IDH-induced EMT is dependent on up-regulation of the transcription factor ZEB1 and down-regulation of the miR-200 family of microRNAs. Furthermore, sustained knockdown of IDH1 in IDH1 R132H mutant cells is sufficient to reverse many characteristics of EMT, demonstrating that continued expression of mutant IDH is required to maintain this phenotype. These results suggest mutant IDH proteins can reversibly deregulate discrete signaling pathways that contribute to tumorigenesis.
3418	mutations in the genes encoding isocitrate dehydrogenase 1 and 2 (IDH1/2) occur in a variety of tumor types, resulting in production of the proposed oncometabolite, 2-hydroxyglutarate (2-HG). How mutant IDH and 2-HG alter signaling pathways to promote cancer, however, remains unclear. Additionally, there exist relatively few cell lines with IDH mutations. To examine the effect of endogenous IDH mutations and 2-HG, we created a panel of isogenic epithelial cell lines with either wild-type IDH1/2 or clinically relevant IDH1/2 mutations.  Differences were noted in the ability of IDH mutations to cause robust 2-HG accumulation. IDH1/2 mutants that produce high levels of 2-HG cause an epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT)-like phenotype, characterized by changes  in EMT-related gene expression and cellular morphology. 2-HG is sufficient to recapitulate aspects of this phenotype in the absence of an IDH mutation. In the  cells types examined, mutant IDH-induced EMT is dependent on up-regulation of the transcription factor ZEB1 and down-regulation of the miR-200 family of microRNAs. Furthermore, sustained knockdown of IDH1 in IDH1 R132H mutant cells is sufficient to reverse many characteristics of EMT, demonstrating that continued expression of mutant IDH is required to maintain this phenotype. These results suggest mutant IDH proteins can reversibly deregulate discrete signaling pathways that contribute to tumorigenesis.
3480	The type-I insulin-like growth factor receptor (IGF-IR) is frequently overexpressed in breast cancer and therapeutic agents targeting IGF-IR are currently in development. The ultimate success of anti-IGF-IR therapies will depend on the extent to which established tumors remain dependent upon IGF-IR signaling for sustained growth. To investigate the potential benefits and pitfalls of targeting IGF-IR, we used a doxycycline inducible mouse model of IGF-IR initiated breast cancer. We found that downregulation of IGF-IR results in tumor-size-dependent regression to an undetectable state. Partially regressed tumors almost always resumed growth in the absence of doxycycline and a proportion of tumors that regressed to an undetectable state ultimately recurred. This re-emergence of tumor growth in the absence of doxycycline was facilitated by IGF-IR-dependent and IGF-IR-independent mechanisms. tumor escape from IGF-IR dependence was associated with an epithelial to mesenchymal transition and upregulation of transcriptional repressors of E-cadherin. These results suggest that tumors initiated by IGF-IR have the ability to become independent of this initiating oncogene, and IGF-IR independence is associated with characteristics consistent with an epithelial to mesenchymal transition.
3486	Insulin-like growth factor-binding protein (IGFBP)-3 is overexpressed frequently  in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma. Yet, the role of IGFBP3 in esophageal tumor biology remains to be elucidated. We find that IGFBP3 facilitates transforming growth factor (TGF)-beta1-mediated epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in transformed human esophageal epithelial cells, EPC2-hTERT-EGFR-p53(R175H). In organotypic 3D culture, a form of human tissue engineering, laser-capture microdissection revealed concurrent upregulation of TGF-beta target genes, IGFBP3 and EMT-related genes in the cells invading into the stromal compartment. IGFBP3 enhanced TGF-beta1-mediated EMT as well as transcription factors essential in EMT by allowing persistent SMAD2 and SMAD3 phosphorylation. TGF-beta1-mediated EMT and cell invasion were enhanced by ectopically expressed IGFBP3 and suppressed by RNA interference directed against  IGFBP3. The IGFBP3 knockdown effect was rescued by IGFBP3(I56G/L80G/L81G), a mutant IGFBP3 lacking an insulin-like growth factor (IGF)-binding capacity. Thus, IGFBP3 can regulate TGF-beta1-mediated EMT and cell invasion in an IGF or insulin-like growth factor 1 receptor-independent manner. IGFBP3(I56G/L80G/L81G)  also promoted EMT in vivo in a Ras-transformed human esophageal cell line T-TeRas upon xenograft transplantation in nude mice. In aggregate, IGFBP3 may have a novel IGF-binding independent biological function in regulation of TGF-beta1-mediated EMT and cell invasion.
3491	BACKGROUND: Despite recent advances in outlining the mechanisms involved in pancreatic carcinogenesis, precise molecular pathways and cellular lineage specification remains incompletely understood. RESULTS: We show here that Cyr61/CCN1 play a critical role in pancreatic carcinogenesis through the induction of EMT and stemness. Cyr61 mRNA and protein were detected in the early  precursor lesions and their expression intensified with disease progression. Cyr61/CCN1 expression was also detected in different pancreatic cancer cell lines. The aggressive cell lines, in which the expressions of mesenchymal/stem cell molecular markers are predominant; exhibit more Cyr61/CCN1 expression. Cyr61 expression is exorbitantly higher in cancer stem/tumor initiating Panc-1-side-population (SP) cells. Upon Cyr61/CCN1 silencing, the aggressive behaviors are reduced by obliterating interlinking pathobiological events such as reversing the EMT, blocking the expression of stem-cell-like traits and inhibiting migration. In contrast, addition of Cyr61 protein in culture medium augments EMT and stemness features in relatively less aggressive BxPC3 pancreatic cancer cells. Using a xenograft model we demonstrated that cyr61/CCN1 silencing in Panc-1-SP cells reverses the stemness features and tumor initiating potency of these cells. Moreover, our results imply a miRNA-based mechanism for the regulation of aggressive behaviors of pancreatic cancer cells by Cyr61/CCN1. CONCLUSIONS: In conclusion, the discovery of the involvement of Cyr61/CCN1 in pancreatic carcinogenesis may represent an important marker for PDAC and suggests Cyr61/CCN1 can be a potential cancer therapeutic target.
3553	Cytokines present in the tumor microenvironment can promote the invasiveness and  metastatic potential of cancer cells. We therefore investigated the effects of interleukin-1 beta (IL-1B) and transforming growth factor beta-3 (TGFB3) on the non-small cell lung carcinoma (NSCLC) cell line A549. We found that these cytokines synergistically activated matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-1, MMP-3, and  MMP-10 gene expression in these cells through mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK)-dependent pathways. Consistent with this, both cytokines stimulated epithelial to mesenchymal transition and MAPK-dependent invasion through Matrigel. These studies identify IL-1B and TGFB3 as pro-invasive factors in NSCLC and potential therapeutic targets for tumor progression.CI  - Copyright (c) 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.
3570	Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is overexpressed in ovarian carcinomas, with direct or indirect activation of EGFR able to trigger tumour growth. We demonstrate significant activation of both signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT)3 and its upstream activator Janus kinase (JAK)2, in high-grade ovarian carcinomas compared with normal ovaries and benign tumours. The association between STAT3 activation and migratory phenotype of ovarian cancer cells was investigated by EGF-induced epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in OVCA 433 and SKOV3 ovarian cancer cell lines. Ligand activation of EGFR  induced a fibroblast-like morphology and migratory phenotype, consistent with the upregulation of mesenchyme-associated N-cadherin, vimentin and nuclear translocation of beta-catenin. This occurred concomitantly with activation of the downstream JAK2/STAT3 pathway. Both cell lines expressed interleukin-6 receptor (IL-6R), and treatment with EGF within 1 h resulted in a several-fold enhancement of mRNA expression of IL-6. Consistent with that, EGF treatment of both OVCA 433  and SKOV3 cell lines resulted in enhanced IL-6 production in the serum-free medium. Exogenous addition of IL-6 to OVCA 433 cells stimulated STAT3 activation  and enhanced migration. Blocking antibodies against IL-6R inhibited IL-6 production and EGF- and IL-6-induced migration. Specific inhibition of STAT3 activation by JAK2-specific inhibitor AG490 blocked STAT3 phosphorylation, cell motility, induction of N-cadherin and vimentin expression and IL6 production. These data suggest that the activated status of STAT3 in high-grade ovarian carcinomas may occur directly through activation of EGFR or IL-6R or indirectly through induction of IL-6R signalling. Such activation of STAT3 suggests a rationale for a combination of anti-STAT3 and EGFR/IL-6R therapy to suppress the  peritoneal spread of ovarian cancer.
3606	Ureteral obstruction results in renal fibrosis in part due to inflammatory injury. The role of interleukin-18 (IL-18), an important mediator of inflammation, in the genesis of renal fibrosis was studied using transgenic mice  overexpressing human IL-18-binding protein. In addition, HK-2 cells were analyzed following direct exposure to IL-18 compared to control media. Two weeks after ureteral obstruction, the kidneys of wild-type mice had a significant increase in IL-18 production, collagen deposition, alpha-smooth muscle actin and RhoA expression, fibroblast and macrophage accumulation, chemokine expression, and transforming growth factor-beta1 (TGF-beta1) and tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha) production, whereas E-cadherin expression was simultaneously decreased. The transgenic mice with neutralized IL-18 activity exhibited significant reductions in these indicators of obstruction-induced renal fibrosis  and epithelial- mesenchymal transition, without demonstrating alterations in TGF-beta1 or TNF-alpha activity. Similarly, the HK-2 cells exhibited increased alpha-smooth muscle actin expression and collagen production, and decreased E-cadherin expression in response to IL-18 stimulation without alterations in TNF-alpha or TGF-beta1 activity. Our study demonstrates that IL-18 is a significant mediator of obstruction-induced renal fibrosis and epithelial- mesenchymal transition independent of downstream TGF-beta1 or TNF-alpha production.
3611	Integrin-linked kinase (ILK) is a multifunctional serine/threonine kinase in cytoplasm. Recent studies showed that cancer patients with increased ILK expression had low survival, poor prognosis and increased metastasis. Although the causes of ILK overexpression remain to be fully elucidated, accumulating evidence suggests that its oncogenic capacity derives from its regulation of several downstream targets that provide cells with signals that promote proliferation, survival and migration. However, the mechanisms underlying tumor metastasis by ILK is still not fully understood. epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a critical event of cancer cells that triggers invasion and metastasis. We recently reported that knockdown of ILK inhibited the growth and induced apoptosis in human bladder cancer cells. Therefore, we postulate that ILK might involve in EMT. Here we further investigate the function of ILK with RNA interference in bladder cancer cells. Knockdown of ILK impeded an EMT with low Vimentin, Snail, Slug and Twist as well as high E-cadherin expression in vivo and vitro. In addition, we found that knockdown of ILK inhibited cell proliferation,  migration and invasion as well as changed cell morphology, adhesion and rearranged cytoskeleton in vitro. We also demonstrated that ILK siRNA inhibited phosphorylation of downstream signaling targets Akt and GSK3beta, increased expression of nm23-H1, as well as reduced expression of MMP-2 and MMP-9 in vivo and vitro. Furthermore, downregulation of ILK could increase expression of Ribonuclease inhibitor (RI), an important acidic cytoplasmic protein with many functions. Finally, the effects of ILK siRNA on bladder cancer cell phenotype and invasiveness translate into suppression for tumorigenesis and metastasis in vivo. Taken together, our findings highlight that ILK signaling pathway plays a novel role in the development of bladder cancer through regulating EMT. ILK could be a  promising diagnostic marker and therapeutic target for bladder cancer.
3655	CD117-positive cells contributing to cardiac cell turnover in normal and pathological conditions have recently been described in adult human heart. Since  the precise spatial and temporal expression of extracellular matrix proteins and  their receptors is critical for organ formation, we compared the distribution of  cardiac primitive CD117-positive cells in the human adult normal and pathological hearts with ischemic cardiomyopathy, with respect to localization and expression  of laminin and integrin isoforms. In the pathological hearts, CD117-positive cells were significantly more numerous than in the normal hearts. They were localized mainly in the atria and were up to 38-fold more numerous in the subepicardium than in the myocardium. Compared with normal hearts, most CD117-positive cells in the subepicardium of pathological hearts were alpha(6) integrin-positive. Laminin-1, typical of developing heart, was found predominantly in the subepicardium of adult heart. Immunoblotting revealed its highest expression in the normal atrium and pathological left ventricle. Both laminin isoforms reduced apoptosis and increased proliferation and migration of CD117-positive cells in vitro with respect to control, but the effects of laminin-1 significantly outweighed those of laminin-2. Signaling mediated by alpha(6) integrin was implicated in the migration and protection from apoptosis,  as documented by transfection with specific small interfering RNA. These data reveal that the increase in the number of cardiac CD117-positive cells and the expression of laminin-1 are observed in ischemic cardiomyopathy. Subepicardial localization of CD117-positive cells and expression of laminin-1 and alpha(6) integrin subunits may all correspond to the activation of regeneration involving  an epithelial-mesenchymal transition recently described in adult heart.
367	The loss of E-cadherin gene expression can cause the dysfunction of the cell-cell junction to trigger tumor metastasis. Members of the Snail family of transcription factors are repressors of the expression of the E-cadherin gene. In this study, we showed that the activated androgen receptor (AR) is a novel repressor of E-cadherin gene expression and can promote metastasis. Our results demonstrated that the activated AR could bind to the E-cadherin promoter in vitro and in vivo. The activated AR and HDAC1 had synergistic effects in downregulating E-cadherin gene expression. Treating cells with the AR ligand, dihydrotestosterone (DHT), triggered the reduction of E-cadherin expression and induced changes in cell morphology from an epithelial-like to a mesenchymal-like  appearance. When nonmetastatic breast cancer cells expressing cytoplasmic AR were transplanted into mice and the mice were treated with DHT, tumors were detected at metastatic sites, whereas no tumors were detected in transplanted mice without DHT treatment. Furthermore, clinical data from breast cancer patients with invasive ductal carcinomas showed high levels of AR expression in the nuclei and  low levels of E-cadherin expression. These results suggest that, similarly to Snail and Twist, the activated AR can downregulate E-cadherin expression to promote the activation of epithelial-mesenchymal transition and tumor metastasis.
3678	epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a process implicated in tumor invasion, metastasis, embryonic development and wound healing. ZEB2 is a transcription factor involved in EMT that represses E-cadherin transcription. Although E-cadherin downregulation is a major event during EMT and tumor progression, E-cadherin reduction is probably not sufficient for full invasiveness. The mechanisms by which E-cadherin transcriptional repressors induce mesenchymal genes during EMT remain largely unknown. Here, we investigated the role of ZEB2 in the induction of integrin alpha5 during cancer EMT and its underlying mechanism. In human cancer cells, ZEB2 was found to directly upregulate integrin alpha5 transcription in a manner that is independent of the regulation of E-cadherin expression. Conversely, depletion of ZEB2 by small interfering RNA suppressed integrin alpha5 expression, leading to reduced invasion. Suppression of integrin alpha5 inhibited cancer cell invasion, suggesting an important role for integrin alpha5 in cancer progression. Furthermore, ZEB2 was found to activate the integrin alpha5 and vimentin promoters by interacting with and activating the transcription factor Sp1, suggesting that cooperation between ZEB2 and Sp1 represents a novel mechanism of  mesenchymal gene activation during EMT. These findings increase our understanding of the pathways beyond E-cadherin reduction that regulate mesenchymal gene expression during EMT and cancer progression.
3688	Reduced epithelial cadherin (E-cad) is a hallmark of invasive carcinomas that have acquired epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) phenotypes. Here we show that down-regulated E-cad expression induced by transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta) and EMT preceded breast cancer outgrowth in three-dimensional (3D) organotypic assays and in the lungs of mice. Pharmacological inhibitors against focal adhesion kinase prevented metastatic outgrowth of newly seeded organoids, but not that of their fully established counterparts. Interrogating the D2-HAN (hyperplastic alveolar nodule) model of breast cancer dormancy and metastasis showed that dormant D2.OR cells produced branched organoid morphologies in 3D-cultures, and expressed robust quantities of E-cad that was uncoupled from regulation by TGF-beta. In contrast, metastatic D2.A1 organoids were spherical and wholly lacked E-cad expression. Interestingly, D2.A1 cells engineered to re-express E-cad formed branched organoids, down-regulated beta1 integrin expression, and failed to undergo metastatic outgrowth. The tumor-suppressing function of E-cad was inactivated by increased microenvironmental rigidity, and was not recapitulated by expression of an E-cad mutant lacking its extracellular  domain. Twist expression, but not that of Snail, reinitiated metastatic outgrowth in dormant D2.OR cells. Our findings show that EMT and its down-regulated expression of E-cad circumvent breast cancer dormancy in part by facilitating beta1 integrin expression necessary for metastatic outgrowth.
3690	INTRODUCTION: Transforming growth factor (TGF)-beta suppresses breast cancer formation by preventing cell cycle progression in mammary epithelial cells (MECs). During the course of mammary tumorigenesis, genetic and epigenetic changes negate the cytostatic actions of TGF-beta, thus enabling TGF-beta to promote the acquisition and development of metastatic phenotypes. The molecular mechanisms underlying this conversion of TGF-beta function remain poorly understood but may involve signaling inputs from integrins. METHODS: beta3 Integrin expression or function in MECs was manipulated by retroviral transduction of active or inactive beta3 integrins, or by transient transfection  of small interfering RNA (siRNA) against beta3 integrin. Altered proliferation, invasion, and epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) stimulated by TGF-beta in control and beta3 integrin manipulated MECs was determined. Src involvement in beta3 integrin mediated alterations in TGF-beta signaling was assessed by performing Src protein kinase assays, and by interdicting Src function pharmacologically and genetically. RESULTS: TGF-beta stimulation induced alphavbeta3 integrin expression in a manner that coincided with EMT in MECs. Introduction of siRNA against beta3 integrin blocked its induction by TGF-beta and prevented TGF-beta stimulation of EMT in MECs. beta3 integrin interacted physically with the TGF-beta receptor (TbetaR) type II, thereby enhancing TGF-beta stimulation of mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs), and of Smad2/3-mediated gene transcription in MECs. Formation of beta3 integrin:TbetaR-II complexes blocked TGF-beta mediated growth arrest and increased TGF-beta mediated invasion and EMT. Dual beta3 integrin:TbetaR-II activation induced tyrosine phosphorylation of TbetaR-II, a phosphotransferase reaction mediated by Src in vitro. Inhibiting Src activity in MECs prevented the  ability of beta3 integrin to induce TbetaR-II tyrosine phosphorylation, MAPK activation, and EMT stimulated by TGF-beta. Lastly, wild-type and D119A beta3 integrin expression enhanced and abolished, respectively, TGF-beta stimulation of invasion in human breast cancer cells. CONCLUSION: We show that beta3 integrin alters TGF-beta signaling in MECs via Src-mediated TbetaR-II tyrosine phosphorylation, which significantly enhanced the ability of TGF-beta to induce EMT and invasion. Our findings suggest that beta3 integrin interdiction strategies may represent an innovative approach to re-establishing TGF-beta mediated tumor suppression in progressing human breast cancers.
3691	The beta 4 integrin is expressed in epithelial cells, a few other cell types and  in some carcinomas. Despite this restricted expression pattern and the functional importance of beta 4 integrin in epithelial and carcinoma biology, little is known about how its expression is regulated. Here, we assessed the epigenetic regulation of beta 4 integrin based on the presence of a large CpG island in the  beta 4-integrin gene promoter. We separated basal (beta 4+) and luminal (beta 4-) epithelial cells from the mammary glands of K14-eGFP mice and demonstrated that the beta 4-integrin promoter is unmethylated in basal cells and methylated in luminal cells. We also observed that expression of beta 4 integrin and E-cadherin is lost during the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) of mammary gland cells induced by transforming growth factor beta (TGFbeta), which is coincident with de novo DNA methylation, a decrease in active histone modifications (H3K9Ac  and H3K4me3) and an increase in the repressive histone modification H3K27me3. Furthermore, TGFbeta withdrawal promotes a mesenchymal-to-epithelial transition (MET) and triggers the re-expression of beta 4 integrin and E-cadherin. Intriguingly, demethylation at either promoter is not obligatory for transcriptional reactivation after TGFbeta withdrawal. However, both H3K9Ac and H3K4me3 modifications are restored during the MET, and H3K27me3 is reduced, strongly suggesting that reversible histone modifications rather than DNA demethylation are the predominant factors in reactivating expression of these genes. Our data indicate that complex epigenetic modifications contribute to the  regulation of the beta 4 integrin and E-cadherin.
3714	epithelial tumor cells transit to a mesenchymal state in response to extracellular cues, in a process known as epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT). The precise nature of these cues has not been fully defined, an important  issue given that EMT is an early event in tumor metastasis. Here, we have found that a population of metastasis-prone mouse lung adenocarcinoma cells expresses Notch and Notch ligands and that the Notch ligand Jagged2 promotes metastasis. Mechanistically, Jagged2 was found to promote metastasis by increasing the expression of GATA-binding (Gata) factors, which suppressed expression of the microRNA-200 (miR-200) family of microRNAs that target the transcriptional repressors that drive EMT and thereby induced EMT. Reciprocally, miR-200 inhibited expression of Gata3, which reversed EMT and abrogated metastasis, suggesting that Gata3 and miR-200 are mutually inhibitory and have opposing effects on EMT and metastasis. Consistent with this, high levels of Gata3 expression correlated with EMT in primary tumors from 2 cohorts of lung adenocarcinoma patients. These findings reveal what we believe to be a novel Jagged2/miR-200-dependent pathway that mediates lung adenocarcinoma EMT and metastasis in mice and may have implications for the treatment of human epithelial tumors.
3717	Progression to metastasis is the proximal cause of most cancer-related mortality. Yet much remains to be understood about what determines the spread of tumor cells. This paper describes a novel pathway in breast cancer that regulates epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT), motility, and invasiveness. We identify two transcription factors, nuclear factor 1-C2 (NF1-C2) and Forkhead box F1 (FoxF1), downstream of prolactin/nuclear Janus-activated kinase 2, with opposite effects on these processes. We show that NF1-C2 is lost during mammary tumor progression and is almost invariably absent from lymph node metastases. NF1-C2 levels in primary tumors correlate with better patient survival. Manipulation of NF1-C2 levels by expression of a stabilized version or using small interfering RNA showed that NF1-C2 counteracts EMT, motility, invasiveness, and tumor growth. FoxF1 was found to be a direct repressed target of NF1-C2. We provide the first evidence for a role of FoxF1 in cancer and in the regulation of EMT in cells of epithelial origin. Overexpression of FoxF1 was associated with a  mesenchymal phenotype, increased invasiveness in vitro, and enhanced growth of breast carcinoma xenografts in nude mice. The relevance of these findings is strengthened by the correlation between FoxF1 expression and a mesenchymal phenoype in breast cancer cell isolates, consistent with the interpretation that  FoxF1 promotes invasion and metastasis.
3756	BACKGROUND: Human ether a go-go-1 (EAG1) potassium channels are potential tools for cancer diagnosis, prognosis and therapy. epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a likely mechanism by which tumor cells become malignant. We wondered whether EAG1 is regulated in human lung tumor cells undergoing EMT. MATERIALS AND METHODS: EMT was induced in A549 lung tumor cells with transforming growth factor beta (TGFbeta1). EAG1 gene expression was assesed by real-time RT-PCR and protein expression by flow cytometry. RESULTS: TGFbeta1 produced the expected changes in  morphology, migration and gene expression associated to EMT. EAG1 gene and protein expression were up-regulated during EMT. Astemizole did not prevent EMT.  CONCLUSION: Our results suggest that EAG1 channels participate in the acquisition of a malignant phenotype in lung tumor cells. Their potential role in EMT might not be uniquely related to their conducting function, in accordance with the reported tumor growth supported by non-conducting EAG1 channels.
3815	epithelial-mesenchymal transition is implicated in the remodelling of tissues during development and in the adult life. In the heart, it gives origin to progenitors of fibroblasts, coronary endothelium, smooth muscle cells, and cardiomyocytes. Moreover, epicardially-derived cells determine myocardial wall thickness and Purkinje fibre network. Recently, the presence of numerous cardiac  stem cells in the subepicardium of the adult human heart has been described and the hypothesis that epicardially-derived cells can contribute to the population of cardiac stem cells in the adult heart has been advanced. In an effort to test  this hypothesis and establish a possible link between epicardium, epicardially-derived cells and cardiac stem cells in the adult human heart we have examined epicardial mesothelial cells in the normal and pathological adult human heart with ischemic cardiomyopathy in vivo and we have induced and documented their epithelial-mesenchymal transition in vitro. Noticeably, epicardial cells were missing from the surface of pathological hearts and the cells with the expression of epithelial and mesenchymal markers populated thick subepicardial space. When the fragments of epicardium from the normal hearts were cultured on the specific substrate formed by extracellular matrix derived from cardiac fibroblasts, we obtained the outgrowth of the epithelial sheet with the mRNA and protein expression characteristic of epicardium. TGFbeta induced cellular and molecular changes typical of epithelial-mesenchymal transition. Moreover, the epicardially-derived cells expressed CD117 antigen. Thus, this study provides evidence that cardiac stem cells can originate from epithelial-mesenchymal transition of the epicardial cells in the adult human heart.CI  - Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
3845	Plexiform and/or dermal neurofibromas are nerve sheath tumors of the peripheral nervous system that are usually present in individuals with neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1). Neurofibromas arise from Schwann cells with biallelic inactivation  of NF1, the gene that encodes neurofibromin. This protein is responsible for regulation of the Ras-mediated pathway, which has been shown to play a crucial role in epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT). EMT is a biological process that occurs during embryogenesis and wound healing and is involved in pathological processes such as organ fibrosis and cancer metastasis. However, the relationship between neurofibromin and EMT has not been elucidated. We investigated whether the EMT-related signaling pathway was upregulated in NF1-associated neurofibromas and Schwann cells by assessing the expression levels of the EMT-related transcription factors Snail, Slug, Twist, ZEB1 and ZEB2. Immunohistochemical studies and quantitative reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction revealed an increase in the expression levels of EMT-related transcription factors in neurofibroma specimens and NF1-derived Schwann cells (sNF96.2). In addition, the silencing of NF1 by siRNA induced the expression of EMT-related transcription factors in normal human Schwann cells and in epithelial-like breast cancer cells. Our findings suggest that the loss of neurofibromin activated the EMT-related signaling pathway and that the excessive  mesenchymal reaction may play a key role in the development of NF1-associated neurofibromas.
387	epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) is involved in embryological development, cancerous metastatic spread and organ fibrosis, including the kidney. This process is largely driven by transforming growth factor-beta and recent evidence has implicated Rho as a key intracellular signalling molecule. In this study we have used RNA interference to silence the genetically distinct Rho  (A, B and C) isoforms to define their individual functions in human kidney epithelial cells undergoing EMT. We demonstrate that the downregulation of the epithelial cell marker E-cadherin is dependent upon the Rho effector, Rho-kinase. However, silencing RhoA or RhoC expression also results in E-cadherin loss, though each by different mechanisms. Loss of RhoA leads to an upregulation of Snail1 and a reduction in the transcription of E-cadherin whereas loss of RhoC upregulates its breakdown via proteasomal degradation. During EMT, the upregulation of alpha-smooth muscle actin can be blocked by inhibiting the expression of RhoA, but not by that of RhoB or RhoC. This effect is independent of Rho-kinase activity. RhoC is the isoform solely responsible for stress fibre formation and inhibiting its expression reduces EMT-induced migration by 50%. RhoB appears to play a role in cell survival as inhibiting its expression leads to >300% increase in cell apoptosis and a relocalization of focal adhesion kinase. We conclude that Rho is a key signalling molecule in the process of EMT but that each isoform has a distinct and specific role.
3880	Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is the sixth most common type of cancer worldwide. Strong prognostic indicators that predict development of distant metastases are the presence and number of lymph node metastases in the neck, and extranodal spread. Recently, it was shown in several studies that also  the presence of disseminated tumor cells (DTC) in the bone marrow predicts development of distant metastases. We have investigated whether protein signatures could be detected in primary HNSCC that distinguish tumors that disseminate into the bone marrow from those that do not. Therefore, DTC-positive  and -negative primary HNSCC tumors were analyzed by 2D-DIGE. A signature consisting of 51 differential protein spots was identified upon stratification for bone marrow status, which allowed a correct classification of DTC-positive and DTC-negative HNSCC tumors in 95% of cases, using hierarchical clustering. The most prominent feature within this signature was the down-regulation of CK19 in DTC-positive tumors. Our data show that tumor cell dissemination to the bone marrow, the onset of hematogenic metastasis, can be deduced from the protein profile in the primary tumor. The highly significant down-regulation of CK19 supports a model of epithelial-mesenchymal transition for tumors that show a high proclivity for hematogenic dissemination.CI  - Copyright (c) 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
3897	Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) and chronic pancreatitis, representing one risk factor for PDAC, are characterized by a marked desmoplasia enriched of pancreatic myofibroblasts (PMFs). Thus, PMFs are thought to essentially promote pancreatic tumorigenesis. We recently demonstrated that the adhesion molecule L1CAM is involved in epithelial-mesenchymal transition of PMF-cocultured H6c7 human ductal epithelial cells and that L1CAM is expressed already in ductal structures of chronic pancreatitis with even higher elevation in primary tumors and metastases of PDAC patients. This study aimed at investigating whether PMFs and L1CAM drive malignant transformation of pancreatic ductal epithelial cells by enhancing their tumorigenic potential. Cell culture experiments demonstrated that in the presence of PMFs, H6c7 cells exhibit a profound resistance against death ligand-induced apoptosis. This apoptosis protection was similarly observed in H6c7 cells stably overexpressing L1CAM. Intrapancreatic inoculation of H6c7 cells together with PMFs (H6c7co) resulted in tumor formation in 7/8 and liver metastases in 6/8 severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID) mice, whereas no tumors and metastases were detectable after inoculation of H6c7 cells alone. Likewise, tumor outgrowth and metastases resulted from inoculation of L1CAM-overexpressing  H6c7 cells in 5/7 and 3/7 SCID mice, respectively, but not from inoculation of mock-transfected H6c7 cells. Treatment of H6c7co tumor-bearing mice with the L1CAM antibody L1-9.3/2a inhibited tumor formation and liver metastasis in 100 and 50%, respectively, of the treated animals. Overall, these data provide new insights into the mechanisms of how PMFs and L1CAM contribute to malignant transformation of pancreatic ductal epithelial cells in early stages of pancreatic tumorigenesis.
3911	epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is suggested to be crucial for the development of an invasive and metastatic carcinoma cell phenotype. Therefore, the definition of this phenotype is of great clinical interest. We recently evidenced vimentin positive cells in oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) invasive front expressing laminin gamma2 chain mRNA implicating an EMT origin of these cells. To further elucidate the nature of these cells, we have investigated the relation between EMT criteria and laminin-332 expression in a cell culture model  of transforming growth factor beta-1 (TGFbeta1)/epithelial growth factor (EGF) long time co-stimulation. We demonstrate that in contrast to TGFbeta1 or EGF alone, co-stimulation induces phenotype transition in OSCC cells which fulfils the criteria of EMT in terms of vimentin up-regulation and E-cadherin down-regulation on protein level as well as cell scattering. Furthermore, cells displayed a strongly enhanced invasiveness and adhesion to type I-IV collagens. Phenotype transition is accompanied by an enhanced expression of laminin-332, especially of its gamma2 chain. We further analyse the expression of extracellular matrix related genes by RT-PCR profiling. With respect to strongly  enhanced proteins, data confirm the EMT phenotype of co-stimulated OSCC cells and expression of laminin-332. Furthermore, alpha catenin, collagen type 16, the integrin alpha7 and beta1 chains, and MMP11 are suggested as candidates with potential role in EMT in OSCC. In summary we are able to show that EMT in OSCC is mediated by multiple growth factors and is accompanied by laminin gamma2 chain up-regulation evidencing the existence of an intermediate Vim(+) /Ln332(+) EMT phenotype as seen in situ.CI  - (c) 2010 John Wiley & Sons A/S.
3934	Here, we report that lipocalin 2 (Lcn2) promotes breast cancer progression, and we identify the mechanisms underlying this function. We first found that Lcn2 levels were consistently associated with invasive breast cancer in human tissue and urine samples. To investigate the function of Lcn2 in breast cancer progression, Lcn2 was overexpressed in human breast cancer cells and was found to up-regulate mesenchymal markers, including vimentin and fibronectin, down-regulate the epithelial marker E-cadherin, and significantly increase cell motility and invasiveness. These changes in marker expression and cell motility are hallmarks of an epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT). In contrast, Lcn2 silencing in aggressive breast cancer cells inhibited cell migration and the mesenchymal phenotype. Furthermore, reduced expression of estrogen receptor (ER)  alpha and increased expression of the key EMT transcription factor Slug were observed with Lcn2 expression. Overexpression of ERalpha in Lcn2-expressing cells reversed the EMT and reduced Slug expression, suggesting that ERalpha negatively  regulates Lcn2-induced EMT. Finally, orthotopic studies demonstrated that Lcn2-expressing breast tumors displayed a poorly differentiated phenotype and showed increased local tumor invasion and lymph node metastasis. Taken together,  these in vitro, in vivo, and human studies demonstrate that Lcn2 promotes breast  cancer progression by inducing EMT through the ERalpha/Slug axis and may be a useful biomarker of breast cancer.
3952	Perturbations in the adipocytokine profile, especially higher levels of leptin, are a major cause of breast tumor progression and metastasis; the underlying mechanisms, however, are not well understood. In particular, it remains elusive whether leptin is involved in epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). Here, we provide molecular evidence that leptin induces breast cancer cells to undergo a transition from epithelial to spindle-like mesenchymal morphology. Investigating  the downstream mediator(s) that may direct leptin-induced EMT, we found functional interactions between leptin, metastasis-associated protein 1 (MTA1), and Wnt1 signaling components. Leptin increases accumulation and nuclear translocation of beta-catenin leading to increased promoter recruitment. Silencing of beta-catenin or treatment with the small molecule inhibitor, ICG-001, inhibits leptin-induced EMT, invasion, and tumorsphere formation. Mechanistically, leptin stimulates phosphorylation of glycogen synthase kinase 3beta (GSK3beta) via Akt activation resulting in a substantial decrease in the formation of the GSK3beta-LKB1-Axin complex that leads to increased accumulation  of beta-catenin. Leptin treatment also increases Wnt1 expression that contributes to GSK3beta phosphorylation. Inhibition of Wnt1 abrogates leptin-stimulated GSK3beta phosphorylation. We also discovered that leptin increases the expression of an important modifier of Wnt1 signaling, MTA1, which is integral to leptin-mediated regulation of the Wnt/beta-catenin pathway as silencing of MTA1 inhibits leptin-induced Wnt1 expression, GSK3beta phosphorylation, and beta-catenin activation. Furthermore, analysis of leptin-treated breast tumors shows increased expression of Wnt1, pGSK3beta, and vimentin along with higher nuclear accumulation of beta-catenin and reduced E-cadherin expression providing  in vivo evidence for a previously unrecognized cross-talk between leptin and MTA1/Wnt signaling in epithelial-mesenchymal transition of breast cancer cells.
3987	PINCH-1 is an adaptor protein that binds to the integrin-linked kinase (ILK), an  intracellular serine/threonine protein kinase that plays a critical role in mediating tubular epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT). To determine whether PINCH-1 is also involved in the EMT process, we investigated its regulation and function during TGF-beta1-stimulated EMT. TGF-beta1 induced PINCH-1 mRNA and protein expression in human proximal tubular epithelial cells in a time-dependent fashion, an effect that was largely dependent on intracellular Smad signaling. Overexpression of PINCH-1 suppressed epithelial markers E-cadherin and ZO-1 and increased fibronectin expression and extracellular assembly, whereas knockdown of PINCH-1 via small interfering RNA reduced TGF-beta1-mediated fibronectin expression and partially restored E-cadherin. PINCH-1 formed a ternary complex with ILK at the focal adhesion sites of tubular  epithelial cells. Treatment with an ILK inhibitor or disruption of the ILK/PINCH-1 interaction by overexpressing a dominant-negative N-terminal ankyrin  domain of ILK resulted in reduced fibronectin deposition, indicating that the ability of PINCH-1 to stimulate EMT is ILK-dependent. In a mouse model of obstructive nephropathy, PINCH-1 expression increased in a time-dependent manner, suggesting that it may play a role in EMT and renal fibrosis in vivo. We conclude that PINCH-1, through its interaction with ILK, plays an important role in regulating TGF-beta1-mediated EMT and could be a potential future therapeutic target to prevent progression of renal disease.
4015	Hypoxia has been shown to promote tumor metastasis and lead to therapy resistance. Recent work has demonstrated that hypoxia represses E-cadherin expression, a hallmark of epithelial to mesenchymal transition, which is believed to amplify tumor aggressiveness. The molecular mechanism of E-cadherin repression is unknown, yet lysyl oxidases have been implicated to be involved. Gene expression of lysyl oxidase (LOX) and the related LOX-like 2 (LOXL2) is strongly  induced by hypoxia. In addition to the previously demonstrated LOX, we characterize LOXL2 as a direct transcriptional target of HIF-1. We demonstrate that activation of lysyl oxidases is required and sufficient for hypoxic repression of E-cadherin, which mediates cellular transformation and takes effect in cellular invasion assays. Our data support a molecular pathway from hypoxia to cellular transformation. It includes up-regulation of HIF and subsequent transcriptional induction of LOX and LOXL2, which repress E-cadherin and induce epithelial to mesenchymal transition. Lysyl oxidases could be an attractive molecular target for cancers of epithelial origin, in particular because they are partly extracellular.
4017	Hypoxia has been shown to promote tumor metastasis and lead to therapy resistance. Recent work has demonstrated that hypoxia represses E-cadherin expression, a hallmark of epithelial to mesenchymal transition, which is believed to amplify tumor aggressiveness. The molecular mechanism of E-cadherin repression is unknown, yet lysyl oxidases have been implicated to be involved. Gene expression of lysyl oxidase (LOX) and the related LOX-like 2 (LOXL2) is strongly  induced by hypoxia. In addition to the previously demonstrated LOX, we characterize LOXL2 as a direct transcriptional target of HIF-1. We demonstrate that activation of lysyl oxidases is required and sufficient for hypoxic repression of E-cadherin, which mediates cellular transformation and takes effect in cellular invasion assays. Our data support a molecular pathway from hypoxia to cellular transformation. It includes up-regulation of HIF and subsequent transcriptional induction of LOX and LOXL2, which repress E-cadherin and induce epithelial to mesenchymal transition. Lysyl oxidases could be an attractive molecular target for cancers of epithelial origin, in particular because they are partly extracellular.
4040	Aberrant activation of the Wnt pathway contributes to human cancer progression. Antagonists that interfere with Wnt ligand/receptor interactions can be useful in cancer treatments. In this study, we evaluated the therapeutic potential of a soluble Wnt receptor decoy in cancer gene therapy. We designed a Wnt antagonist sLRP6E1E2, and generated a replication-incompetent adenovirus (Ad), dE1-k35/sLRP6E1E2, and a replication-competent oncolytic Ad, RdB-k35/sLRP6E1E2, both expressing sLRP6E1E2. sLRP6E1E2 prevented Wnt-mediated stabilization of cytoplasmic beta-catenin, decreased Wnt/beta-catenin signaling and cell proliferation via the mitogen-activated protein kinase, and phosphatidylinositol  3-kinase pathways. sLRP6E1E2 induced apoptosis, cytochrome c release, and increased cleavage of PARP and caspase-3. sLRP6E1E2 suppressed growth of the human lung tumor xenograft, and reduced motility and invasion of cancer cells. In addition, sLRP6E1E2 upregulated expression of epithelial marker genes, while sLRP6E1E2 downregulated mesenchymal marker genes. Taken together, sLRP6E1E2, by inhibiting interaction between Wnt and its receptor, suppressed Wnt-induced cell  proliferation and epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition.
406907	BACKGROUND: Recent profile studies of microRNA (miRNA) expression have documented a deregulation of miRNA (miR-124) in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). OBJECTIVE: To determine the status of miR-124 expression and its underlying mechanisms in the pathogenesis of HCC. METHODS: The expression levels of miR-124 were first examined in HCC cell lines and tumour tissues by real-time PCR. The in vitro and  in vivo functional effect of miR-124 was examined further. A luciferase reporter  assay was conducted to confirm target associations. RESULTS: The expression levels of miR-124 were frequently reduced in HCC cells and tissues, and low-level expression of miR-124 was significantly associated with a more aggressive and/or  poor prognostic phenotype of patients with HCC (p<0.05). In HCC cell lines, stable overexpression of miR-124 was sufficient to inhibit cell motility and invasion in vitro, and suppress intrahepatic and pulmonary metastasis in vivo. In addition, ectopic overexpression of miR-124 in HCC cells inhibited epithelial-mesenchymal cell transition, formation of stress fibres, filopodia and lamellipodia. Further studies showed that miR-124 could directly target the 3'-untranslated region (3'-UTR) of both ROCK2 and EZH2 mRNAs, and suppress their  mRNA and protein expressions. These findings suggest that miR-124 plays a critical role in regulating cytoskeletal events and epithelial-mesenchymal cell transition and, ultimately, inhibits the invasive and/or metastatic potential of  HCC, probably by its direct target on ROCK2 and EZH2 genes. These results provide functional and mechanistic links between the tumour suppressor miRNA-124 and the  two oncogenes ROCK2 and EZH2 on the aggressive nature of HCC. CONCLUSION: These data highlight an important role for miR-124 in the regulation of invasion and metastasis in the molecular aetiology of HCC, and suggest a potential application of miR-124 in prognosis prediction and cancer treatment.
406928	Carboxyl-terminal binding protein 1 (CtBP1) is a transcriptional co-repressor that represses expression of various tumor suppressor genes. In the present study, we identified miR-137 as a potential regulator of CtBP1 expression in melanoma cells. expression of miR-137 in melanoma cell lines was found to inversely correlate with CtBP1 levels. Target Scan predicted a putative site for  miR-137 within the CtBP1 3' untranslated region (3'UTR) at nt 710-716, which is highly conserved across species. To explore the mechanism of miR-137 targeting CtBP1, we performed an Argonaute 2 (Ago2)-pull down assay, and miR-137 was identified in complex with CtBP1 mRNA. miR-137 suppressed CtBP1 3' UTR luciferase-reporter activity, and this effect was lost with deletion of the putative 3' UTR target-site. Consistent with the results of the reporter assay, ectopic expression of miR-137 reduced expression levels of CtBP1. Furthermore, expression of miR-137 increased the immediate downstream effectors of CtBP1, such as E-cadherin and Bax. The human miR-137 gene is located at chromosome 1p22, which has previously been determined to be a susceptive region for melanoma. This study suggests miR-137 may act as a tumor suppressor by directly targeting CtBP1  to inhibit epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and inducing apoptosis of melanoma cells, thus illustrating a functional link between miR-137 and CtBP1 in  melanoma development.
406941	OBJECTIVE: To investigate the function and mechanism of miR-149 in nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC). METHODS: The expression of miR-149 was examined by real-time PCR and calculated by 2(-triangle uptriangle upCt) method. The cell proliferation was analyzed by MTT assay. The cell migration and invasion were shown by the wound healing assay and transwell migration assay, and the expression of E-cadherin was detected by Western blot. RESULTS: The expression of miR-149 was higher in NPC cell lines 5-8F and 6-10B than that in normal immortalized nasopharyngeal epithelial NP69. MTT assay showed that miR-149 promoted the proliferation of NPC  cell lines. The wound healing assay showed miR-149 promoted the mobility and invasion of NPC cell lines. Inhibition of miR-149 reduced the ability of NPC cell lines to proliferate and invade. miR-149 downregulated the expression of E-cadherin, whereas antagomir which mediated knockdown of miR-149 significantly upregulated the expression of E-cadherin. CONCLUSION: miR-149 might be involved in the invasion and metastasis of NPC through regulation of epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT).
406949	Chemotherapy has been reported to induce epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT)  in tumor cells, which is a critical step in the process of metastasis leading to  cancer spreading and treatment failure. However, the underlying mechanisms of chemotherapy-induced EMT remain unclear, and the involvement of microRNAs (miRNA) in this process is poorly understood. To address these questions, we established  stable chemotherapy-resistant tongue squamous cell carcinoma (TSCC) cell lines CAL27-res and SCC25-res by exposing the parental CAL27 and SCC25 lines to escalating concentrations of cisplatin for 6 months. CAL27-res and SCC25-res cells displayed mesenchymal features with enhanced invasiveness and motility. MiRNA microarray illustrated that miR-200b and miR-15b were the most significantly downregulated microRNAs in CAL27-res cells. Ectopic expression of miR-200b and miR-15b with miRNA mimics effectively reversed the phenotype of EMT  in CAL27-res and SCC25-res cells, and sensitized them to chemotherapy, but inhibition of miR-200b and miR-15b in the sensitive lines with anti-sense oligonucleotides induced EMT and conferred chemoresistance. Retrieving the expression of B lymphoma Mo-MLV insertion region 1 homolog (BMI1), a target for miR-200b and miR-15b, in the presence of the miRNA mimics by transfecting CAL27-res cells with pcDNA3.1-BMI1-carrying mutated seed sequences of miR-200b or miR-15b at its 3'-UTR recapitulated chemotherapy-induced EMT. In vivo, enforced miR-200b or miR-15b expression suppressed metastasis of TSCC xenografts established by CAL27-res cells. Clinically, reduced miR-200b or miR-15b expression was associated with chemotherapeutic resistance in TSCCs and poor patient survival. Our data suggest that reduced expression of miR-200b and miR-15b underscores the mechanisms of chemotherapy-induced EMT in TSCC, and may serve as therapeutic targets to reverse chemotherapy resistance in tongue cancers.
406968	OBJECTIVE: To investigate the effect of epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) on the expression of microRNAs (miRNAs) in lung cancer A549 cells. METHODS: Transforming growth factor beta-1 (TGF-beta 1) in different concentrations was used to induce EMT in lung cancer A549 cells. The morphological changes were observed under phase-contrast microscope. The changes of EMT-related proteins were analyzed by Western blot. The changes of miRNAs expression after EMT were detected by microRNA (miRNA) array. Real time quantitative RT-PCR was applied to  verify the reliability of miRNA array results. RESULTS: The lung cancer A549 cells became elongated and the cell-cell junction became loose after EMT. The epithelial protein marker E-cadherin was down-regulated and the mesenchymal protein markers vimentin and fibronectin up-regulated. There were 51 miRNAs showing statistically significant changes of expression more than double (P<0.05) after EMT. Among them 18 were up-regulated and 33 down-regulated. Of them, mir-33a was down-regulated by 92.8% and mir-193a-3p by 86.5%. Real time quantitative RT-PCR showed that mir-33a was down-regulated by 73.1% and mir-193a-3p by 56.6%. CONCLUSION: epithelial-mesenchymal transition has effects on the expression of miRNAs, and miRNAs may regulate the invasion and metastasis  of lung cancer cells via EMT.
406969	BACKGROUND: epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is the key process driving cancer metastasis. Oncogene/self renewal factor BMI-1 has been shown to induce EMT in cancer cells. Recent studies have implied that noncoding microRNAs (miRNAs) act as crucial modulators for EMT. The aims of this study was to determine the roles of BMI-1 in inducing EMT of endometrial cancer (EC) cells and the possible role of miRNA in controlling BMI-1 expression. METHODS AND RESULTS:  We evaluated the expression of BMI-1 gene in a panel of EC cell lines, and detected a strong association with invasive capability. Stable silencing of BMI-1 in invasive mesenchymal-type EC cells up-regulated the epithelial marker E-cadherin, down-regulated mesenchymal marker Vimentin, and significantly reduced cell invasion in vitro. Furthermore, we discovered that the expression of BMI-1 was suppressed by miR-194 via direct binding to the BMI-1 3'-untranslated region  3'-UTR). Ectopic expression of miR-194 in EC cells induced a mesenchymal to epithelial transition (MET) by restoring E-cadherin, reducing Vimentin expression, and inhibiting cell invasion in vitro. Moreover, BMI-1 knockdown inhibited in vitro EC cell proliferation and clone growth, correlated with either increased p16 expression or decreased expression of stem cell and chemoresistance markers (SOX-2, KLF4 and MRP-1). CONCLUSION: These findings demonstrate the novel mechanism for BMI-1 in contributing to EC cell invasion and that repression of BMI-1 by miR-194 could have a therapeutic potential to suppress EC metastasis.
406983	Although the epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a normal process that occurs during development, it is thought to be associated with cancer progression and metastasis. Emerging evidence links mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) in the tumor microenvironment with the occurrence of EMT in cancer progression. In this  study, the human breast cancer cell line MCF7 was co-cultured with human adipose-derived MSCs (hAD-MSCs) in a transwell system. Co-cultured cells were analyzed for changes in cellular morphology, EMT markers, protein expression and  tumor characteristics. We found that co-cultured MCF7 cells underwent EMT and established a stable mesenchymal phenotype after prolonged co-culturing. Here, we demonstrate that paracrine transforming growth factor-beta1 (TGF-beta1) secreted  by hAD-MSCs regulated the establishment of EMT in MCF7 cells by targeting the ZEB/miR-200 regulatory loop. The downregulation of paracrine TGF-beta1 levels can inhibit and reverse the EMT progress by downregulating ZEB1/2 and upregulating miR-200b and miR-200c. The maintenance of a stable mesenchymal state by MCF7 cells required the establishment of autocrine TGF-beta signaling to drive and sustain ZEB expression, which had been initiated by the prolonged co-culturing with hAD-MSCs. These results suggest that MSCs may promote breast cancer metastasis by stimulating and facilitating the EMT process.
406984	Most chronic kidney injuries inevitably progress to irreversible renal fibrosis.  Tubular epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is recognized to play pivotal  roles in the process of renal fibrosis. However, a comprehensive understanding of the pathogenesis of renal scar formation and progression remains an urgent task for renal researchers. The endogenously produced microRNAs (miRNAs), proved to play important roles in gene regulation, probably regulate most genes involved in EMT. In this study, we applied microarray analysis to investigate the expression  profiles of miRNA in murine interstitial fibrotic kidneys induced by unilateral ureteral obstruction (UUO). It was found that miR-200a and miR-141, two members of the miR-200 family, were downregulated at the early phase of UUO. In TGF-beta1-induced tubular EMT in vitro, it was also found that the members of the miR-200 family were downregulated in a Smad signaling-dependent manner. It was demonstrated that the miR-200 family was responsible for protecting tubular epithelial cells from mesenchymal transition by target suppression of zinc finger E-box-binding homeobox (ZEB) 1 and ZEB2, which are E-cadherin transcriptional repressors. The results suggest that downregulation of the miR-200 family initiates the dedifferentiation of renal tubules and progression of renal fibrosis, which might provide important targets for novel therapeutic strategies.
406985	Most chronic kidney injuries inevitably progress to irreversible renal fibrosis.  Tubular epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is recognized to play pivotal  roles in the process of renal fibrosis. However, a comprehensive understanding of the pathogenesis of renal scar formation and progression remains an urgent task for renal researchers. The endogenously produced microRNAs (miRNAs), proved to play important roles in gene regulation, probably regulate most genes involved in EMT. In this study, we applied microarray analysis to investigate the expression  profiles of miRNA in murine interstitial fibrotic kidneys induced by unilateral ureteral obstruction (UUO). It was found that miR-200a and miR-141, two members of the miR-200 family, were downregulated at the early phase of UUO. In TGF-beta1-induced tubular EMT in vitro, it was also found that the members of the miR-200 family were downregulated in a Smad signaling-dependent manner. It was demonstrated that the miR-200 family was responsible for protecting tubular epithelial cells from mesenchymal transition by target suppression of zinc finger E-box-binding homeobox (ZEB) 1 and ZEB2, which are E-cadherin transcriptional repressors. The results suggest that downregulation of the miR-200 family initiates the dedifferentiation of renal tubules and progression of renal fibrosis, which might provide important targets for novel therapeutic strategies.
406988	BACKGROUND: Esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) is often diagnosed at later stages until they are incurable. MicroRNA (miR) is a small, non-coding RNA that negatively regulates gene expression mainly via translational repression. Accumulating evidence indicates that deregulation of miR is associated with human malignancies including ESCC. The aim of this study was to identify miR that could be specifically expressed and exert distinct biological actions in ESCC. METHODS: Total RNA was extracted from ESCC cell lines, OE21 and TE10, and a non-malignant  human esophageal squamous cell line, Het-1A, and subjected to microarray analysis. expression levels of miR that showed significant differences between the 2 ESCC and Het-1A cells based on the comprehensive analysis were analyzed by  the quantitative reverse transcriptase (RT)-PCR method. Then, functional analyses, including cellular proliferation, apoptosis and Matrigel invasion and the wound healing assay, for the specific miR were conducted. Using ESCC tumor samples and paired surrounding non-cancerous tissue obtained endoscopically, the  association with histopathological differentiation was examined with quantitative RT-PCR. RESULTS: Based on the miR microarray analysis, there were 14 miRs that showed significant differences (more than 2-fold) in expression between the 2 ESCC cells and non-malignant Het-1A. Among the significantly altered miRs, miR-205 expression levels were exclusively higher in 5 ESCC cell lines examined than any other types of malignant cell lines and Het-1A. Thus, miR-205 could be a specific miR in ESCC. Modulation of miR-205 expression by transfection with its precursor or anti-miR-205 inhibitor did not affect ESCC cell proliferation and apoptosis, but miR-205 was found to be involved in cell invasion and migration. Western blot revealed that knockdown of miR-205 expression in ESCC cells substantially enhanced expression of zinc finger E-box binding homeobox 2, accompanied by reduction of E-cadherin, a regulator of epithelial mesenchymal transition. The miR-205 expression levels were not associated with histological differentiation of human ESCC. CONCLUSIONS: These results imply that miR-205 is an ESCC-specific miR that exerts tumor-suppressive activities with EMT inhibition by targeting ZEB2.
406991	cancer stem cells (CSCs) are predicted to be critical drivers of tumor progression due to their "stemness", but the molecular mechanism of CSCs in regulating metastasis remains to be elucidated. epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF)-1alpha, and miR-21, all of which contribute to cell migration for metastasis, are interrelated with CSCs. In the present study, third-sphere forming (3-S) CSC-like cells, which showed elevated CSC surface markers (ALDH1(+) and CD44(+)/CD24(-/low)) and sphereforming capacity as  well as migration and invasion capacities, were cultured and isolated from breast cancer MCF-7 parental cells, to evaluate the role of miR-21 in regulating the CSC-like cell biological features, especially EMT. EMT, which was assessed by overexpression of mesenchymal cell markers (N-cadherin, Vimentin, alpha-smooth muscle actin [alpha-SMA]) and suppression of epithelial cell marker (E-cadherin), was induced in 3-S CSC-like cells. Moreover, both of HIF-1alpha and miR-21 were upregulated in the CSC-like cells. Interestingly, antagonism of miR-21 by antagomir led to reversal of EMT, downexpression of HIF-1alpha, as well as suppression of invasion and migration, which indicates a key role of miR-21 involved in regulate CSC-associated features. In conclusion, we demonstrated that the formation of CSC-like cells undergoing process of EMT-like associated with overexpression of HIF-1alpha, both of which are regulated by miR-21.CI  - (c) 2012 Japanese cancer Association.
407006	Compared with the luminal subtype, the basal-like subtype of breast cancer has an aggressive clinical behavior, but the reasons for this difference between the two subtypes are poorly understood. We identified microRNAs (miRNAs) miR-221 and miR-222 (miR-221/222) as basal-like subtype-specific miRNAs that decrease expression of epithelial-specific genes and increase expression of mesenchymal-specific genes. In addition, expression of these miRNAs increased cell migration and invasion, which collectively are characteristics of the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT). The basal-like transcription factor FOSL1 (also known as Fra-1) directly stimulated the transcription of miR-221/222, and the abundance of these miRNAs decreased with inhibition of MEK (mitogen-activated or extracellular signal-regulated protein kinase kinase), placing miR-221/222 downstream of the RAS pathway. The miR-221/222-mediated reduction in E-cadherin abundance depended on their targeting of the 3' untranslated region (3'UTR) of TRPS1 (trichorhinophalangeal syndrome type 1), which is a member of the GATA family of transcriptional repressors. TRPS1 inhibited EMT by directly repressing expression of ZEB2 (Zinc finger E-box-binding homeobox 2). Therefore, miR-221/222 may contribute to the aggressive clinical behavior of basal-like breast cancers.
407007	Compared with the luminal subtype, the basal-like subtype of breast cancer has an aggressive clinical behavior, but the reasons for this difference between the two subtypes are poorly understood. We identified microRNAs (miRNAs) miR-221 and miR-222 (miR-221/222) as basal-like subtype-specific miRNAs that decrease expression of epithelial-specific genes and increase expression of mesenchymal-specific genes. In addition, expression of these miRNAs increased cell migration and invasion, which collectively are characteristics of the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT). The basal-like transcription factor FOSL1 (also known as Fra-1) directly stimulated the transcription of miR-221/222, and the abundance of these miRNAs decreased with inhibition of MEK (mitogen-activated or extracellular signal-regulated protein kinase kinase), placing miR-221/222 downstream of the RAS pathway. The miR-221/222-mediated reduction in E-cadherin abundance depended on their targeting of the 3' untranslated region (3'UTR) of TRPS1 (trichorhinophalangeal syndrome type 1), which is a member of the GATA family of transcriptional repressors. TRPS1 inhibited EMT by directly repressing expression of ZEB2 (Zinc finger E-box-binding homeobox 2). Therefore, miR-221/222 may contribute to the aggressive clinical behavior of basal-like breast cancers.
407010	Transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta)-induced epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) has been shown to be related to the pathogenesis of various diseases including lung cancer. Recently, microRNAs (miRNA) have been recognized  as a new class of genes involved in human tumorigenesis. MiR-23a/24/27a is a miRNA cluster located in chromosome 19p13.12, which can function as an oncogene in several human cancers. In this study, we analyzed miR-23a/24/27a expression in 10 non-small cell cancer (NSCLC) cell lines by real-time PCR analysis. Correlation between expression of these miRNAs and TGF-beta/Smad signaling was evaluated. We found that miR-23a could be regulated by TGF-beta1 in a Smad-dependent manner in A549 lung adenocarcinoma cells showing the EMT phenomenon. Knockdown of miR-23a partially restored E-cadherin expression under conditions of TGF-beta1 stimulation. In contrast, overexpression of miR-23a could suppress E-cadherin expression and stimulate EMT. Furthermore, A549 cells with overexpressed miR-23a were more resistant to gefitinib compared to the parental cells. These findings suggest that miR-23a regulates TGF-beta-induced EMT by targeting E-cadherin in lung cancer cells and may be useful as a new therapeutic  target in NSCLC.
407029	epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition is a phenomenon necessary for embryonic development and also seen during certain pathological conditions. We show here for the first time that reduction in miR-30 family microRNAs, is responsible for  mesenchymal transition of primary cultures of human pancreatic epithelial cells.  We found that miR-30 family microRNAs target mesenchymal gene transcripts and maintain them in a translationally inactive state. Forced depletion using miR-30  family specific anti-miRs leads to mesenchymal transition while ectopic overexpression maintains the epithelial phenotype. We also show that miR-30 family microRNAs increase in abundance during differentiation of pancreatic islet-derived mesenchymal cells into hormone-producing islet-like cell aggregates. Our studies in human adult diseased pancreas also demonstrate that miR-30 family microRNAs are expressed at lower abundance in fibrotic lesions during pancreatitis. Together, our data confirm that miR-30 family microRNAs form a part of the regulatory signaling events involved in cellular response of pancreatic epithelial cells during mesenchymal transition.
407039	OBJECTIVE: To investigate the effect of epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) on the expression of microRNAs (miRNAs) in lung cancer A549 cells. METHODS: Transforming growth factor beta-1 (TGF-beta 1) in different concentrations was used to induce EMT in lung cancer A549 cells. The morphological changes were observed under phase-contrast microscope. The changes of EMT-related proteins were analyzed by Western blot. The changes of miRNAs expression after EMT were detected by microRNA (miRNA) array. Real time quantitative RT-PCR was applied to  verify the reliability of miRNA array results. RESULTS: The lung cancer A549 cells became elongated and the cell-cell junction became loose after EMT. The epithelial protein marker E-cadherin was down-regulated and the mesenchymal protein markers vimentin and fibronectin up-regulated. There were 51 miRNAs showing statistically significant changes of expression more than double (P<0.05) after EMT. Among them 18 were up-regulated and 33 down-regulated. Of them, mir-33a was down-regulated by 92.8% and mir-193a-3p by 86.5%. Real time quantitative RT-PCR showed that mir-33a was down-regulated by 73.1% and mir-193a-3p by 56.6%. CONCLUSION: epithelial-mesenchymal transition has effects on the expression of miRNAs, and miRNAs may regulate the invasion and metastasis  of lung cancer cells via EMT.
407040	Snail1 is a zinc finger transcriptional repressor whose pathological expression has been linked to cancer cell epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) programs and the induction of tissue-invasive activity, but pro-oncogenic events capable of regulating Snail1 activity remain largely uncharacterized. Herein, we demonstrate that p53 loss-of-function or mutation promotes cancer cell EMT by de-repressing Snail1 protein expression and activity. In the absence of wild-type p53 function, Snail1-dependent EMT is activated in colon, breast, and lung carcinoma cells as a consequence of a decrease in miRNA-34 levels, which suppress Snail1 activity by binding to highly conserved 3' untranslated regions in Snail1  itself as well as those of key Snail1 regulatory molecules, including beta-catenin, LEF1, and Axin2. Although p53 activity can impact cell cycle regulation, apoptosis, and DNA repair pathways, the EMT and invasion programs initiated by p53 loss of function or mutation are completely dependent on Snail1  expression. These results identify a new link between p53, miR-34, and Snail1 in  the regulation of cancer cell EMT programs.
407042	tumor-initiating cells (T-ICs), a subpopulation of cancer cells with stem cell-like properties, are related to tumor relapse and metastasis. Our previous studies identified a distinct profile of microRNA (miRNA) expression in breast T-ICs (BT-ICs), and the dysregulated miRNAs contribute to the self-renewal and tumorigenesis of these cells. However, the underlying mechanisms for miRNA dysregulation in BT-ICs remain obscure. In the present study, we demonstrated that the expression and function of miR-34c were reduced in the BT-ICs of MCF-7 and SK-3rd cells, a breast cancer cell line enriched for BT-ICs. Ectopic expression of miR-34c reduced the self-renewal of BT-ICs, inhibited epithelial-mesenchymal transition, and suppressed migration of the tumor cells via silencing target gene Notch4. Furthermore, we identified a single hypermethylated CpG site in the promoter region of miR-34c gene that contributed  to transcriptional repression of miR-34c in BT-ICs by reducing DNA binding activities of Sp1. Therefore, miR-34c reduction in BT-ICs induced by a single hypermethylated CpG site in the promoter region promotes self-renewal and epithelial-mesenchymal transition of BT-ICs.
407046	MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are increasingly implicated in regulating the malignant progression of cancer. Here we show that miR-9, which is upregulated in breast cancer cells, directly targets CDH1, the E-cadherin-encoding messenger RNA, leading to increased cell motility and invasiveness. miR-9-mediated E-cadherin downregulation results in the activation of beta-catenin signalling, which contributes to upregulated expression of the gene encoding vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF); this leads, in turn, to increased tumour angiogenesis. Overexpression of miR-9 in otherwise non-metastatic breast tumour cells enables these cells to form pulmonary micrometastases in mice. Conversely, inhibiting miR-9 by using a 'miRNA sponge' in highly malignant cells inhibits metastasis formation. expression of miR-9 is activated by MYC and MYCN, both of which directly bind to the mir-9-3 locus. Significantly, in human cancers, miR-9 levels correlate with MYCN amplification, tumour grade and metastatic status. These findings uncover a regulatory and signalling pathway involving a metastasis-promoting miRNA that is predicted to directly target expression of the key metastasis-suppressing protein E-cadherin.
4072	epithelial cell adhesion molecule (EpCAM) is highly expressed in epithelial-transformed neoplasia and tumor-initiated cells (TICs), but the role that EpCAM plays in the stemness properties of TICs is still unclear. Here we show that EpCAM and reprogramming factors (c-Myc, Oct4, Nanog, and Sox2) were concomitantly elevated in TICs, which were shown to have superior self-renewal, invasiveness, and tumor-initiating abilities. Elevation of EpCAM enhanced tumorsphere formation and tumor initiation. Knockdown of EpCAM inhibited the expressions of reprogramming factors and epithelial-mesenchymal transition genes, thereby suppressing tumor initiation, self-renewal, and invasiveness. In addition, EpCAM, especially intracellular domain of EpCAM (EpICD), bound to and activated the promoter of reprogramming factors. Treatment with the inhibitor of  gamma-secretase (DAPT) led to the blockage of the expressions of reprogramming factors and epithelial-mesenchymal transition genes, which was accompanied by the reduction of tumor self-renewal and invasion. Furthermore, the increased release  of EpEX enhanced production of EpICD and regulated the expression of reprogramming factors. Together, these findings suggest that EpCAM plays an important role in regulating cancer-initiating abilities in TICs of colon cancer. This discovery can be used in the development of new strategies for cancer therapy.
4087	The versatile cytokine transforming growth factor beta (TGF-beta) regulates cellular growth, differentiation, and migration during embryonic development and  adult tissue homeostasis. Activation of TGF-beta receptors leads to phosphorylation of Smad2 and Smad3, which oligomerize with Smad4 and accumulate in the nucleus where they recognize gene regulatory regions and orchestrate transcription. Termination of Smad-activated transcription involves Smad dephosphorylation, nuclear export, or ubiquitin-mediated degradation. In an unbiased proteomic screen, we identified poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase-1 (PARP-1) as a Smad-interacting partner. PARP-1 dissociates Smad complexes from DNA by ADP-ribosylating Smad3 and Smad4, which attenuates Smad-specific gene responses and TGF-beta-induced epithelial-mesenchymal transition. Thus, our results identify ADP-ribosylation of Smad proteins by PARP-1 as a key step in controlling the strength and duration of Smad-mediated transcription.CI  - Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
4088	Previous studies demonstrate that response gene to complement 32 (RGC-32) mediates transforming growth factor-beta(1)-induced epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) of human renal proximal tubular cells. However, the mechanisms underlying RGC-32 function remain largely unknown. In the present study, we found that RGC-32 function in EMT is associated with Smad3. Coexpression of RGC-32 and  Smad3, but not Smad2, induces a higher mesenchymal marker alpha-smooth muscle actin (alpha-SMA) protein expression as compared with RGC-32 or Smad3 alone, while knockdown of Smad3 using short hairpin interfering RNA blocks RGC-32-induced alpha-SMA expression. These data suggest that RGC-32 interacts with Smad3, but not Smad2, in the regulation of EMT. In addition to alpha-SMA, RGC-32 and Smad3 also synergistically activate the expression of extracellular matrix protein fibronectin and downregulate the epithelial marker E-cadherin. RGC-32 colocalizes with Smad3 in the nuclei of renal proximal tubular cells. Coimmunoprecipitation assays showed that Smad3, but not Smad2, physically interacts with RGC-32 in renal proximal tubular cells. Mechanistically, RGC-32 and Smad3 coordinate the induction of EMT by regulating the EMT regulators Slug and Snail. Taken together, our data demonstrate for the first time that RGC-32 interacts with Smad3 to mediate the EMT of human renal proximal tubular cells.
4089	The versatile cytokine transforming growth factor beta (TGF-beta) regulates cellular growth, differentiation, and migration during embryonic development and  adult tissue homeostasis. Activation of TGF-beta receptors leads to phosphorylation of Smad2 and Smad3, which oligomerize with Smad4 and accumulate in the nucleus where they recognize gene regulatory regions and orchestrate transcription. Termination of Smad-activated transcription involves Smad dephosphorylation, nuclear export, or ubiquitin-mediated degradation. In an unbiased proteomic screen, we identified poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase-1 (PARP-1) as a Smad-interacting partner. PARP-1 dissociates Smad complexes from DNA by ADP-ribosylating Smad3 and Smad4, which attenuates Smad-specific gene responses and TGF-beta-induced epithelial-mesenchymal transition. Thus, our results identify ADP-ribosylation of Smad proteins by PARP-1 as a key step in controlling the strength and duration of Smad-mediated transcription.CI  - Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
4092	The present study was designed to investigate the underlying molecular mechanism  for Angiotensin II type 1 receptor blockers (ARBs) mediated cardio-protection against pressure overload-induced cardiac remodeling with a focus on Smad7. ROCK-1, Smad3 and fibronectin expressions were increased in male C57BL/6 mice underwent transverse aortic constriction (TAC) for 2weeks. Treatment with Candesartan (2mg/kg per day) could effectively downregulate Smad3 and fibronectin accompanied by upregulating of Smad7. Further data showed that Candesartan inhibited TGF-beta1 signal-induced epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) through attenuating matrix metalloproteinases (MMP-9), such effect was abolished  by knocking-down Smad7. Moreover, TAC for 2weeks caused increased collagen deposition, thickness of left ventricular anterior and posterior wall at end-diastole (LVAWD and LVPWD) and LVEF% reduction, which were reversed by treatment with Candesartan, but failed after knocking-down Smad7. In addition, LV dP/dt(max) and dP/dt(min) were increased by TAC for 2weeks, and treatment with Candesartan or Nifedipine effectively depressed the high levels of dP/dt(min) induced by TAC. However, only Candesartan-mediated protective role in improving cardiac function was suppressed by tail-vein injection of Smad7 siRNA. This study uncovered a novel role for ARBs in preventing pressure overload-induced cardiac remodeling via Smad7 upregulation, which suppressed MMP-9 expression and TGF-beta1 signal-mediated EMT progress.CI  - Crown Copyright A(c) 2012. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
4093	Examination of Mullerian inhibiting substance (MIS) signaling in the rat in vivo  and in vitro revealed novel developmental stage- and tissue-specific events that  contributed to a window of MIS responsiveness in Mullerian duct regression. The MIS type II receptor (MISRII)-expressing cells are initially present in the coelomic epithelium of both male and female urogenital ridges, and then migrate into the mesenchyme surrounding the male Mullerian duct under the influence of MIS. expression of the genes encoding MIS type I receptors, Alk2 and Alk3, is also spatiotemporally controlled; Alk2 expression appears earlier and increases predominantly in the coelomic epithelium, whereas Alk3 expression appears later and is restricted to the mesenchyme, suggesting sequential roles in Mullerian duct regression. MIS induces expression of Alk2, Alk3 and Smad8, but downregulates Smad5 in the urogenital ridge. Alk2-specific small interfering RNA  (siRNA) blocks both the transition of MISRII expression from the coelomic epithelium to the mesenchyme and Mullerian duct regression in organ culture. Mullerian duct regression can also be inhibited or accelerated by siRNA targeting Smad8 and Smad5, respectively. Thus, the early action of MIS is to initiate an epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition of MISRII-expressing cells and to specify the components of the receptor/SMAD signaling pathway by differentially regulating their expression.
4162	INTRODUCTION: Metastasis is a complex process involving loss of adhesion, migration, invasion and proliferation of cancer cells. Cell adhesion molecules play a pivotal role in this phenomenon by regulating cell-cell and cell-matrix interactions. CD146 (MCAM) is associated with an advanced tumor stage in melanoma, prostate cancer and ovarian cancer. Studies of CD146 expression and function in breast cancer remain scarce except for a report concluding that CD146 could act as a tumor suppressor in breast carcinogenesis. METHODS: To resolve these apparent discrepancies in the role of CD146 in tumor cells, we looked at the association of CD146 expression with histoclinical features in human primary  breast cancers using DNA and tissue microarrays. By flow cytometry, we characterized CD146 expression on different breast cancer cell lines. Using siRNA or shRNA technology, we studied functional consequences of CD146 downmodulation of MDA-MB-231 cells in migration assays. Wild-type, mock-transfected and downmodulated transfected cells were profiled using whole-genome DNA microarrays  to identify genes whose expression was modified by CD146 downregulation. RESULTS: Microarray studies revealed the association of higher levels of CD146 with histoclinical features that belong to the basal cluster of human tumors. expression of CD146 protein on epithelial cells was detected in a small subset of cancers with histoclinical features of basal tumors. CD146+ cell lines displayed  a mesenchymal phenotype. Downmodulation of CD146 expression in the MDA-MB-231 cell line resulted in downmodulation of vimentin, as well as of a set of genes that include both genes associated with a poor prognosis in a variety of cancers  and genes known to promote cell motility. In vitro functional assays revealed decreased migration abilities associated with decreased CD146 expression. CONCLUSIONS: In addition to its expression in the vascular compartment, CD146 is  expressed on a subset of epithelial cells in malignant breast. CD146 may directly or indirectly contribute to tumor aggressiveness by promoting malignant cell motility. Changes in molecular signatures following downmodulation of CD146 expression suggest that CD146 downmodulation is associated with the reversal of several biological characteristics associated with epithelial to mesenchymal transition, and the phenomenon associated with the metastatic process.
4192	epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) underlies cell plasticity and embryonic development and is frequently observed in advanced tumorigenesis. We demonstrated that midkine (MK), a retinoic acid-inducible heparin-binding mitogen, promotes EMT in immortalized HaCaT keratinocytes. We showed that MK binds to the Notch2 receptor in HaCaT keratinocytes. We further found that MK activates Notch2 signaling leading to protein/protein interactions between Hes1 and Jak2/Stat3 intermediates. We thus suggest that MK-induced cross talk of Notch2/Jak2/Stat3 signaling pathways can regulate cell plasticity and motility contributing to the EMT and later stages of tumorigenesis.
4215	In the developing heart, the epicardium is a major source of progenitor cells that contribute to the formation of the coronary vessel system. These epicardial  progenitors give rise to the different cellular components of the coronary vasculature by undergoing a number of morphological and physiological changes collectively known as epithelial to mesenchymal transformation (EMT). However, the specific signaling mechanisms that regulate epicardial EMT are yet to be delineated. In this study we investigated the role of TGFbeta2 and hyaluronan (HA) during epicardial EMT and how signals from these two molecules are integrated during this important process. Here we show that TGFbeta2 induces MEKK3 activation, which in turn promotes ERK1/2 and ERK5 phosphorylation. TGFbeta2 also increases Has2 expression and subsequent HA production. Nevertheless, inhibition of MEKK3 kinase activity, silencing of ERK5 or pharmacological disruption of ERK1/2 activation significantly abrogates this response. Thus, TGFbeta2 promotes Has2 expression and HA production through a MEKK3/ERK1/2/5-dependent cascade. Furthermore, TGFbeta2 is able to induce epicardial cell invasion and differentiation but not proliferation. However, inhibition of MEKK3-dependent pathways, degradation of HA by hyaluronidases or blockade of CD44, significantly impairs the biological response to TGFbeta2. Taken together, these findings demonstrate that TGFbeta2 activation of MEKK3/ERK1/2/5 signaling modulates Has2 expression and HA production leading to the induction of EMT events. This is an important and novel mechanism showing how TGFbeta2 and HA signals are integrated to regulate changes in epicardial cell behavior.CI  - Published by Elsevier Inc.
4216	epithelial stem cells self-renew while maintaining multipotency, but the dependence of stem cell properties on maintenance of the epithelial phenotype is  unclear. We previously showed that trophoblast stem (TS) cells lacking the protein kinase MAP3K4 maintain properties of both stemness and epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). Here, we show that MAP3K4 controls the activity of the histone acetyltransferase CBP, and that acetylation of histones H2A and H2B by CBP is required to maintain the epithelial phenotype. Combined loss of MAP3K4/CBP activity represses expression of epithelial genes and causes TS cells to undergo EMT while maintaining their self-renewal and multipotency properties. The expression profile of MAP3K4-deficient TS cells defines an H2B acetylation-regulated gene signature that closely overlaps with that of human breast cancer cells. Taken together, our data define an epigenetic switch that maintains the epithelial phenotype in TS cells and reveals previously unrecognized genes potentially contributing to breast cancer.CI  - Copyright (c) 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
4233	The functional role of pericytes in cancer progression remains unknown. Clinical  studies suggest that low numbers of vessel-associated pericytes correlated with a drop in overall survival of patients with invasive breast cancer. Using genetic mouse models or pharmacological inhibitors, pericyte depletion suppressed tumor growth but enhanced metastasis. Pericyte depletion was further associated with increased hypoxia, epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT), and Met receptor activation. Silencing of Twist or use of a Met inhibitor suppressed hypoxia and EMT/Met-driven metastasis. In addition, poor pericyte coverage coupled with high  Met expression in cancer cells speculates the worst prognosis for patients with invasive breast cancer. Collectively, our study suggests that pericytes within the primary tumor microenvironment likely serve as important gatekeepers against  cancer progression and metastasis.CI  - Copyright (c) 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
4248	The epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) plays crucial roles in embryonic development, wound healing, tissue repair, and cancer progression. Results of this study show how transforming growth factor beta1 (TGF-beta1) down-regulates expression of N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase III (GnT-III) during EMT-like changes. Treatment with TGF-beta1 resulted in a decrease in E-cadherin expression and GnT-III expression, as well as its product, the bisected N-glycans, which was confirmed by erythro-agglutinating phytohemagglutinin lectin blot and HPLC analysis in human MCF-10A and mouse GE11 cells. In contrast with GnT-III, the expression of N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase V was slightly enhanced by TGF-beta1 treatment. Changes in the N-glycan patterns on alpha3beta1 integrin, one of the target proteins for GnT-III, were also confirmed by lectin blot analysis. To understand the roles of GnT-III expression in EMT-like changes, the  MCF-10A cell was stably transfected with GnT-III. It is of particular interest that overexpression of GnT-III influenced EMT-like changes induced by TGF-beta1,  which was confirmed by cell morphological changes of phase contrast, immunochemical staining patterns of E-cadherin, and actin. In addition, GnT-III modified E-cadherin, which served to prolong E-cadherin turnover on the cell surface examined by biotinylation and pulse-chase experiments. GnT-III expression consistently inhibited beta-catenin translocation from cell-cell contact into the cytoplasm and nucleus. Furthermore, the transwell assay showed that GnT-III expression suppressed TGF-beta1-induced cell motility. Taken together, these observations are the first to clearly demonstrate that GnT-III affects cell properties, which in turn influence EMT-like changes, and to explain a molecular  mechanism for the inhibitory effects of GnT-III on cancer metastasis.
4313	OBJECTIVES: Excess mineralocorticoids such as deoxycorticosterone acetate (DOCA)  together with salt are known to cause tubulointerstitial fibrosis, but the mechanisms underlying fibrosis progression are unclear. Therefore, we investigated the role of matrix metalloproteinase 2 (MMP2) in the epithelial-mesenchymal transition and fibrosis progression. METHODS: Uninephrectomized rats drank 0.9% NaCl and 0.3% KCl solution and were treated with DOCA alone, DOCA + spironolactone, or vehicle for 1, 4, or 8 weeks. SBP, kidney function and morphology, and kidney and urine MMP2 activity were compared  among the groups. RESULTS: At week 4, the DOCA-treated group exhibited hypertension, tubulointerstitial fibrosis, increased MMP2 activity in the kidney  and urine, and overexpression of MMP2 in proximal tubule cells and MMP14 in apical membranes; these results were more pronounced at week 8. At week 8, the proximal tubule cell apicolateral surface proteins villin, claudin 2, and E-cadherin were downregulated, and the mesenchymal marker alpha-smooth muscle actin was upregulated in the tubulointerstitium of DOCA-treated rats. These DOCA/salt-induced changes (except for hypertension) and fibrosis progression observed at week 8 were reversed by TISAM (a selective MMP2 inhibitor), which was administered from week 4 to week 8. All of the effects of DOCA/salt at week 8 were attenuated by spironolactone. CONCLUSION: Eight weeks of treatment with DOCA/salt activated MMP2, primarily on the apical surface of proximal tubule cells, which induced epithelial-mesenchymal transition from the luminal side and  promoted tubulointerstitial fibrosis progression. These MMP2-induced changes occurred via downstream processes regulated by mineralocorticoid receptors.
4314	Lung cancer is more deadly than colon, breast, and prostate cancers combined, and treatment improvements have failed to improve prognosis significantly. Here, we identify a critical mediator of lung cancer progression, Rac1b, a tumor-associated protein with cell-transforming properties that are linked to the matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-induced epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in lung epithelial cells. We show that expression of mouse Rac1b in lung epithelial  cells of transgenic mice stimulated EMT and spontaneous tumor development and that activation of EMT by MMP-induced expression of Rac1b gave rise to lung adenocarcinoma in the transgenic mice through bypassing oncogene-induced senescence. Rac1b is expressed abundantly in stages 1 and 2 of human lung adenocarcinomas and, hence, is an attractive molecular target for the development of new therapies that prevent progression to later-stage lung cancers.
4316	AIMS: Determination of prognostic parameters that are predictive of survival of gastric cancer (GC) may allow better identification of patients who could benefit from current chemotherapy regimens. To assess the correlation between tumour progression and epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), we assayed the expression levels of selected molecules involved in EMT [CD44, transforming growth factor (TGF)-alpha, cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2), matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-7, MMP-9 and C-X-C chemokine receptor (CXCR4)], and correlated these with overall patient survival (OS) and disease stage. METHODS AND RESULTS: Medical records and pathological biopsy results of 137 patients with GC were evaluated retrospectively. Spearman's correlation analysis showed that expression of CXCR4  was correlated significantly with the expression of all other proteins studied. In contrast, COX-2 expression correlated significantly with the expression of only MMP-7 (P = 0.011), MMP-9 (P = 0.015) and CXCR4 (P = 0.013). We observed significant negative correlations between OS and the expression of TGF-alpha (P = 0.017), COX-2 (P < 0.001), CXCR4 (P = 0.010), MMP-7 (P = 0.020) and MMP-9 (P = 0.015). On multivariate analysis, only COX-2 was an independent prognostic factor for OS [hazard ratio (HR) = 3.34; 95% confidence interval (CI): 1.43-9.75; P = 0.002). CONCLUSIONS: COX-2, TGF-alpha, MMP-7, MMP-9 and CXCR4 are associated with poor OS in gastric cancer.CI  - (c) 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
4318	AIMS: Determination of prognostic parameters that are predictive of survival of gastric cancer (GC) may allow better identification of patients who could benefit from current chemotherapy regimens. To assess the correlation between tumour progression and epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), we assayed the expression levels of selected molecules involved in EMT [CD44, transforming growth factor (TGF)-alpha, cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2), matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-7, MMP-9 and C-X-C chemokine receptor (CXCR4)], and correlated these with overall patient survival (OS) and disease stage. METHODS AND RESULTS: Medical records and pathological biopsy results of 137 patients with GC were evaluated retrospectively. Spearman's correlation analysis showed that expression of CXCR4  was correlated significantly with the expression of all other proteins studied. In contrast, COX-2 expression correlated significantly with the expression of only MMP-7 (P = 0.011), MMP-9 (P = 0.015) and CXCR4 (P = 0.013). We observed significant negative correlations between OS and the expression of TGF-alpha (P = 0.017), COX-2 (P < 0.001), CXCR4 (P = 0.010), MMP-7 (P = 0.020) and MMP-9 (P = 0.015). On multivariate analysis, only COX-2 was an independent prognostic factor for OS [hazard ratio (HR) = 3.34; 95% confidence interval (CI): 1.43-9.75; P = 0.002). CONCLUSIONS: COX-2, TGF-alpha, MMP-7, MMP-9 and CXCR4 are associated with poor OS in gastric cancer.CI  - (c) 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
4322	A classic model of tubulogenesis utilizes Madin-Darby canine kidney (MDCK) cells. MDCK cells form monoclonal cysts in three-dimensional collagen and tubulate in response to hepatocyte growth factor, which activates multiple signaling pathways, including the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway. It was shown previously that MAPK activation is necessary and sufficient to induce the first stage of tubulogenesis, the partial epithelial to mesenchymal transition (p-EMT), whereas matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are necessary for the second redifferentiation stage. To identify specific MMP genes, their regulators, tissue inhibitors of matrix metalloproteinases (TIMPs), and the molecular pathways by which they are activated, we used two distinct MAPK inhibitors and a technique we have termed subtraction pathway microarray analysis. Of the 19 MMPs and 3 TIMPs present on the Canine Genome 2.0 Array, MMP13 and TIMP1 were up-regulated 198- and 169-fold, respectively, via the MAPK pathway. This was confirmed by two-dimensional and three-dimensional real time PCR, as well as in MDCK cells inducible for the MAPK gene Raf. Knockdown of MMP13 using short hairpin RNA prevented progression past the initial phase of p-EMT. Knockdown of TIMP1 prevented normal cystogenesis, although the initial phase of p-EMT did occasionally occur. The MMP13 knockdown phenotype is likely because of decreased  collagenase activity, whereas the TIMP1 knockdown phenotype appears due to increased apoptosis. These data suggest a model, which may also be important for  development of other branched organs, whereby the MAPK pathway controls both MDCK p-EMT and redifferentiation, in part by activating MMP13 and TIMP1.
4323	By mining DNA microarray data bases at GenBank, we identified up-regulation of membrane type 1 matrix metalloproteinase (MT1-MMP) in human primary and metastatic prostate cancer specimens as compared with nonmalignant prostate tissues. To explore the role of up-regulated MT1-MMP in early stage cancer progression, we have employed a three-dimensional cell culture model. Minimally invasive human prostate cancer cells (LNCaP) were transfected with MT1-green fluorescent protein (GFP) chimeric cDNA as compared with GFP cDNA, and morphologic and phenotypic changes were characterized. GFP-expressing LNCaP cells formed multicellular spheroids with cuboidal-like epithelial morphology, whereas  MT1-GFP-expressing cells displayed a fibroblast-like morphology and a scattered growth pattern in type I collagen gels. Cell morphologic changes were accompanied by decreased epithelial markers and enhanced mesenchymal markers, consistent with epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition. MT1-MMP-induced morphologic change and cell scattering were abrogated by target inhibition of either the catalytic domain or  the hemopexin domain. We further demonstrated that MT1-MMP-induced phenotypic changes were dependent upon up-regulation of Wnt5a, which has been implicated in  epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition. We conclude that MT1-MMP plays an important role in early cancer dissemination by converting epithelial cells to migratory mesenchymal-like cells.
4478	Fibrosis of the lung is characterized by the accumulation of myofibroblasts, a key mediator in the fibrogenic reaction. Cumulative evidence indicates that epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), a process whereby epithelial cells become mesenchyme-like, is an important contributing source for the myofibroblast population. Underlying this phenotypical change is a dramatic alteration in cellular structure. The receptor for advanced glycation end-products (RAGE) has been suggested to maintain lung homeostasis by mediating cell adhesion, while the family of ezrin/radixin/moesin (ERM) proteins, on the other hand, serve as an important cross-linker between the plasma membrane and cytoskeleton. In the present investigation, we tested the hypothesis that RAGE and ERM interact and play a key role in regulating EMT-associated structural changes in alveolar epithelial cells. Exposure of A549 cells to inflammatory cytokines resulted in phosphorylation and redistribution of ERM to the cell periphery and localization  with EMT-related actin stress fibers. Simultaneously, blockade of Rho kinase (ROCK) signaling attenuated these cytokine-induced structural changes. Additionally, RAGE expression was diminished after cytokine stimulation, with release of its soluble isoform via a matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-9-dependent mechanism. Immunofluorescence microscopy and coimmunoprecipitation revealed association between ERM and RAGE under basal conditions, which was disrupted when challenged with inflammatory cytokines, as ERM in its activated state complexed with membrane-linked CD44. Dual-fluorescence immunohistochemistry of patient idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) tissues highlighted marked diminution of RAGE in fibrotic samples, together with enhanced levels of CD44 and double-positive cells for CD44 and phospho (p)ERM. These data suggest that dysregulation of the ERM-RAGE complex might be an important step in rearrangement of the actin cytoskeleton during proinflammatory cytokine-induced EMT of human alveolar epithelial cells.
4486	BACKGROUND: Specific tyrosine kinase receptors such as c-MET mediate epithelial-mesenchymal (EMT) transition, leading to phenotypic alterations associated with increased cell motility. It was hypothesized that RON, a tyrosine kinase receptor related to c-MET, would be expressed in human pancreatic cancer cells, induce EMT, and would thus serve as a target for therapy in a preclinical  model. METHODS: RON expression in human pancreatic cancer specimens was assessed  by immunohistochemistry. In pancreatic cancer cell lines, RON expression was assessed by reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and Western blot analysis. The human pancreatic cancer cell line L3.6pl, with high RON expression, was exposed to macrophage stimulating protein (MSP), the RON ligand,  and assessed for cell migration, invasion, and changes associated with EMT. Western blot analysis and immunofluorescent staining were used to assess alterations in protein expression and cellular location, respectively. A RON monoclonal antibody (MoAb) was used to block ligand-induced activation of RON. RESULTS: Immunohistochemical staining revealed RON overexpression in 93% of human pancreatic cancer specimens relative to nonmalignant ductal tissue. RON mRNA and  protein was expressed in 9 of 9 human pancreatic cancer cell lines. Treatment of  L3.6pl cells with MSP increased Erk phosphorylation, cell migration, and invasion (P < .001). RON activation led to a decrease in membrane-bound E-cadherin in association with nuclear translocation of beta-catenin. RON MoAb inhibited downstream signaling as well as cell migration and invasion. In nude mice, RON MoAb inhibited subcutaneous and orthotopic tumor growth by about 60%. CONCLUSIONS: RON activation induced molecular and cellular alterations consistent with EMT. Inhibition of RON activation inhibited tumor growth in vivo. Novel antineoplastic therapies designed to inhibit RON activity may hinder mechanisms critical for pancreatic tumor progression.
4488	epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a process occurring during both embryogenesis and early stages of invasive cancer. epithelial cells that undergo  EMT become more migratory and invasive with a mesenchymal morphology. Herein we assess EMT induction in a mouse mammary epithelial cell line driven by Msx2, a homeobox-containing transcription factor important during mammary gland development. NMuMG cells, a normal mouse mammary epithelial cell line, stably transfected with a Msx2 cDNA showed downregulation of an epithelial marker E-cadherin and upregulation of the mesenchymal markers vimentin and N-cadherin. Furthermore, overexpression of Cripto-1, a member of the epidermal growth factor-CFC protein family already known to be involved in EMT, was detected in Msx2-transfected cells. The expression of Cripto-1 was accompanied by activation  of the tyrosine kinase c-Src pathway and an increase in the invasive ability of the cells. Functional assays also demonstrated inhibition of the invasive behavior of the Msx2-transfected cells by a c-Src specific inhibitor. Moreover, immunohistochemistry of human infiltrating breast carcinomas showed positive staining for Msx2 only in the infiltrating tumor cells while the non-infiltrating tumor cells were negative. These results suggest that Msx2 may play a significant role in promoting EMT in epithelial cells that acquire properties involved in tumor invasion. J. Cell. Physiol. 219: 659-666, 2009. Published 2009 Wiley-Liss,  Inc.
4582	Adherens junctions (AJs) containing epithelial cadherin (E-cad) bound to p120-catenin (p120ctn) and beta-catenin (beta-ctn) play a crucial role in regulating cell-cell adhesion. Cigarette smoke abrogates cell-cell adhesion between epithelial cells by disrupting E-cad, a hallmark of epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), yet the underlying mechanism remains unknown. We used an organotypic culture of primary human bronchial epithelial (HBE) cells treated with smoke-concentrated medium (Smk) to establish an essential role for the interaction between p120ctn and the cytoplasmic tail of MUC1 (MUC1-CT) in regulating E-cad disruption. Within the first 4 h of smoke exposure, apical MUC1-CT repositioned to the basolateral membrane of pseudo-stratified HBE cells, where it interacted with p120ctn. A time-dependent increase in MUC1-CT/p120ctn complexes occurred in conjunction with a time-dependent dissociation of p120ctn/E-cad/beta-ctn complexes, as well as the coordinated degradation of p120ctn and E-cad. Interestingly, Smk induced a similar interaction between MUC1-CT and beta-ctn, but this occurred 44 h after MUC1-CT's initial interaction with p120ctn, and well after the AJs were destroyed. Blocking MUC1-CT's interaction with p120ctn using a MUC1-CT dominant-negative peptide, PMIP, successfully abolished Smk's disruptive effects  on AJs and recovered apical-basolateral polarity of HBE cells. The MUC1-CT/p120ctn interaction was highly dependent on EGFR/Src/Jnk-mediated tyrosine phosphorylation (TyrP) of MUC1-CT. Accordingly, EGFR, Src or Jnk inhibitors (AG1478, PP2, SP600125, respectively) abrogated Smk-induced MUC1-CT-TyrP, MUC1-CT/p120ctn interaction, AJ disruption, and loss of cellular polarity. Our work identified MUC1-CT and p120ctn as important regulators of epithelial polarity and cell-cell adhesion during a smoke-induced EMT-like process. Novel therapeutics designed to inhibit MUC1-CT/p120ctn complex formation may prevent EMT in the smoker's airway.CI  - Copyright (c) 2012 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
4583	epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) underlies cell plasticity and embryonic development and is frequently observed in advanced tumorigenesis. We demonstrated that midkine (MK), a retinoic acid-inducible heparin-binding mitogen, promotes EMT in immortalized HaCaT keratinocytes. We showed that MK binds to the Notch2 receptor in HaCaT keratinocytes. We further found that MK activates Notch2 signaling leading to protein/protein interactions between Hes1 and Jak2/Stat3 intermediates. We thus suggest that MK-induced cross talk of Notch2/Jak2/Stat3 signaling pathways can regulate cell plasticity and motility contributing to the EMT and later stages of tumorigenesis.
4585	The acquisition of invasiveness in ovarian cancer (OC) is accompanied by the process of epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT). The MUC4 mucin is overexpressed in ovarian tumors and has a role in the invasiveness of OC cells. The present study was aimed at evaluating the potential involvement of MUC4 in the metastasis of OC cells by inducing EMT. Ectopic overexpression of MUC4 in OC  cells (SKOV3-MUC4) resulted in morphological alterations along with a decreased expression of epithelial markers (E-cadherin and cytokeratin (CK)-18) and an increased expression of mesenchymal markers (N-cadherin and vimentin) compared with the control cells (SKOV3-vector). Also, pro-EMT transcription factors TWIST1, TWIST2 and SNAIL showed an upregulation in SKOV3-MUC4 cells. We further investigated the pathways upstream of N-cadherin, such as focal adhesion kinase (FAK), MKK7, JNK1/2 and c-Jun, which were also activated in the SKOV3-MUC4 cells  compared with SKOV3-vector cells. Inhibition of phospho-FAK (pFAK) and pJNK1/2 decreased N-cadherin expression in the MUC4-overexpressing cells, which further led to a significant decrease in cellular motility. Knockdown of N-cadherin decreased the activation of extracellular signal-regulated kinase-1/2 (ERK1/2), AKT and matrix metalloproteinase 9 (MMP9), and inhibited the motility in the SKOV3-MUC4 cells. Upon in vivo tumorigenesis and metastasis analysis, the SKOV3-MUC4 cells produced significantly larger tumors and demonstrated a higher incidence of metastasis to distance organs (peritoneal wall, colon, intestine, stomach, lymph nodes, liver and diaphragm). Taken together, our study reveals a novel role for MUC4 in inducing EMT through the upregulation of N-cadherin and promoting metastasis of OC cells.
4609	Sialyl Lewis x (sLe(x)) and sialyl Lewis a (sLe(a)) glycans are expressed on highly metastatic colon cancer cells. They promote extravasation of cancer cells  and tumor angiogenesis via interacting with E-selectin on endothelial cells. Recently, epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) has been noted as a critical phenotypic alteration in metastatic cancer cells. To address the association between sLe(x/a) expression and EMT, we assessed whether sLe(x/a) are highly expressed on colon cancer cells undergoing EMT. Treatment of HT29 and DLD-1 cells with EGF and/or basic FGF (bFGF) induced EMT and significantly increased sLe(x/a) expression resulting in enhanced E-selectin binding activity. The transcript levels of the glycosyltransferase genes ST3GAL1/3/4 and FUT3 were significantly elevated and that of FUT2 was significantly suppressed by the treatment. We provide evidence that ST3GAL1/3/4 and FUT3 are transcriptionally up-regulated by  c-Myc with probable involvement of Ser62 phosphorylation, and that FUT2 is transcriptionally down-regulated through the attenuation of CDX2. The contribution of c-Myc and CDX2 to the sLe(x/a) induction was proved to be significant by knockdown or forced expression experiments. Interestingly, the cells undergoing EMT exhibited significantly increased VEGF secretion, which can  promote tumor angiogenesis in cooperation with sLe(x/a). Finally, immunohistological study indicated high E-selectin ligand expression on cancer cells undergoing EMT in vivo, supporting their coexistence observed in vitro. These results suggest a significant link between sLe(x/a) expression and EMT in colon cancer cells and a pivotal role of c-Myc and CDX2 in regulating sLe(x/a) expression during EMT.
4613	MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are increasingly implicated in regulating the malignant progression of cancer. Here we show that miR-9, which is upregulated in breast cancer cells, directly targets CDH1, the E-cadherin-encoding messenger RNA, leading to increased cell motility and invasiveness. miR-9-mediated E-cadherin downregulation results in the activation of beta-catenin signalling, which contributes to upregulated expression of the gene encoding vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF); this leads, in turn, to increased tumour angiogenesis. Overexpression of miR-9 in otherwise non-metastatic breast tumour cells enables these cells to form pulmonary micrometastases in mice. Conversely, inhibiting miR-9 by using a 'miRNA sponge' in highly malignant cells inhibits metastasis formation. expression of miR-9 is activated by MYC and MYCN, both of which directly bind to the mir-9-3 locus. Significantly, in human cancers, miR-9 levels correlate with MYCN amplification, tumour grade and metastatic status. These findings uncover a regulatory and signalling pathway involving a metastasis-promoting miRNA that is predicted to directly target expression of the key metastasis-suppressing protein E-cadherin.
472	Homeobox 9 (HOXB9), a nontransforming transcription factor overexpressed in breast cancer, alters tumor cell fate and promotes tumor progression and metastasis. Here we show that HOXB9 confers resistance to ionizing radiation by promoting DNA damage response. In nonirradiated cells, HOXB9 induces spontaneous  DNA damage, phosphorylated histone 2AX and p53 binding protein 1 foci, and increases baseline ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM) phosphorylation. Upon ionizing radiation, ATM is hyperactivated in HOXB9-expressing cells during the early stages of the double-stranded DNA break (DSB) response, accelerating accumulation of phosphorylated histone 2AX, mediator of DNA-damage checkpoint 1,  and p53 binding protein 1, at DSBs and enhances DSB repair. The effect of HOXB9 on the response to ionizing radiation requires the baseline ATM activity before irradiation and epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition induced by TGF-beta, a HOXB9 transcriptional target. Our results reveal the impact of a HOXB9-TGF-beta-ATM axis on checkpoint activation and DNA repair, suggesting that TGF-beta may be a key factor that links tumor microenvironment, tumor cell fate, DNA damage response, and radioresistance in a subset of HOXB9-overexpressing breast tumors.
4763	The epicardium is the primary source of coronary vascular smooth muscle cells (cVSMCs) and fibroblasts that reside in the compact myocardium. To form these epicardial-derived cells (EPDCs), the epicardium undergoes the process of epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT). Although several signaling pathways have been identified that disrupt EMT, no pathway has been reported that restricts this developmental process. Here, we identify neurofibromin 1 (Nf1) as  a key mediator of epicardial EMT. To determine the function of Nf1 during epicardial EMT and the formation of epicardial derivatives, cardiac fibroblasts and cVSMCs, we generated mice with a tissue-specific deletion of Nf1 in the epicardium. We found that mutant epicardial cells transitioned more readily to mesenchymal cells in vitro and in vivo. The mesothelial epicardium lost epithelial gene expression and became more invasive. Using lineage tracing of EPDCs, we found that the process of EMT occurred earlier in Nf1 mutant hearts, with an increase in epicardial cells entering the compact myocardium. Moreover, loss of Nf1 caused increased EPDC proliferation and resulted in more cardiac fibroblasts and cVSMCs. Finally, we were able to partially reverse the excessive  EMT caused by loss of Nf1 by disrupting Pdgfralpha expression in the epicardium.  Conversely, Nf1 activation was able to inhibit PDGF-induced epicardial EMT. Our results demonstrate a regulatory role for Nf1 during epicardial EMT and provide insights into the susceptibility of patients with disrupted NF1 signaling to cardiovascular disease.
4782	Progression to metastasis is the proximal cause of most cancer-related mortality. Yet much remains to be understood about what determines the spread of tumor cells. This paper describes a novel pathway in breast cancer that regulates epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT), motility, and invasiveness. We identify two transcription factors, nuclear factor 1-C2 (NF1-C2) and Forkhead box F1 (FoxF1), downstream of prolactin/nuclear Janus-activated kinase 2, with opposite effects on these processes. We show that NF1-C2 is lost during mammary tumor progression and is almost invariably absent from lymph node metastases. NF1-C2 levels in primary tumors correlate with better patient survival. Manipulation of NF1-C2 levels by expression of a stabilized version or using small interfering RNA showed that NF1-C2 counteracts EMT, motility, invasiveness, and tumor growth. FoxF1 was found to be a direct repressed target of NF1-C2. We provide the first evidence for a role of FoxF1 in cancer and in the regulation of EMT in cells of epithelial origin. Overexpression of FoxF1 was associated with a  mesenchymal phenotype, increased invasiveness in vitro, and enhanced growth of breast carcinoma xenografts in nude mice. The relevance of these findings is strengthened by the correlation between FoxF1 expression and a mesenchymal phenoype in breast cancer cell isolates, consistent with the interpretation that  FoxF1 promotes invasion and metastasis.
4790	BACKGROUND: epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) induced by hypoxia is one  of the critical causes of treatment failure in different types of human cancers.  NF-kappaB is closely involved in the progression of EMT. Compared with HIF-1alpha, the correlation between NF-kappaB and EMT during hypoxia has been less studied, and although the phenomenon was observed in the past, the molecular mechanisms involved remained unclear. METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Here, we report that hypoxia or overexpression of hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha (HIF-1alpha) promotes EMT in pancreatic cancer cells. On molecular or pharmacologic inhibition of NF-kappaB, hypoxic cells regained expression of E-cadherin, lost expression of N-cadherin, and attenuated their highly invasive and drug-resistant phenotype. Introducing a pcDNA3.0/HIF-1alpha into pancreatic cancer cells under normoxic conditions heightened NF-kappaB activity, phenocopying EMT effects produced by hypoxia. Conversely, inhibiting the heightened NF-kappaB activity in this setting attenuated the EMT phenotype. CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: These results suggest that hypoxia or overexpression of HIF-1alpha induces the EMT that is largely dependent on NF-kappaB in pancreatic cancer cells.
4851	BACKGROUND: Hypoxia-induced renal tubular cell epithelial-mesenchymal transition  (EMT) is an important event leading to renal fibrosis. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small non-coding RNA molecules that bind to their mRNA targets, thereby leading to translational repression. The role of miRNA in hypoxia-induced EMT is largely  unknown. METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: miRNA profiling was performed for the identification of differentially expressed miRNAs in HK-2 cells under normal and  low oxygen, and the results were then verified by quantitative real time RT-PCR (qRT-PCR). The function of miRNAs in hypoxia-induced renal tubular cell EMT was assessed by the transfection of specific miRNA inhibitors and mimics. Luciferase  reporter gene assays and western blot analysis were performed to validate the target genes of miR-34a. siRNA against Jagged1 was designed to investigate the role of the miR-34a-Notch pathway in hypoxia induced renal tubular cell EMT. miRNA-34a was identified as being downregulated in hypoxic renal tubular epithelial cells. Inhibition of miR-34a expression in HK-2 cells, which highly express endogenous miR-34a, promoted a mesenchymal phenotype accompanied by reduced expression of the epithelial marker Z0-1, E-cadherin and increased expression of the mesenchymal markers alpha-SMA and vimentin. Conversely, miR-34a mimics effectively prevented hypoxia-induced EMT. Transfection of miRNA-34a in HK-2 cells under hypoxia abolished hypoxia-induced expression of Notch1 and Jagged1 as well as Notch downstream signals, such as snail. Western blot analysis and luciferase reporter gene assays showed direct evidence for miR-34a targeting  Notch1 and Jagged1. siRNAs against Jagged1 or Notch1 effectively prevented miR-34a inhibitor-induced tubular epithelial cell EMT. CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE:  Our study provides evidence that the hypoxia-induced decrease of miR-34a expression could promote EMT in renal tubular epithelial cells by directly targeting Notch1 and Jagged1, and subsequently, Notch downstream signaling.
4853	PURPOSE: Lung adenocarcinoma often manifests as tumors with mainly lepidic growth. The size of invasive foci determines a diagnosis of in situ, minimally invasive adenocarcinoma, or invasive types and suggests that some adenocarcinomas undergo malignant progression in that order. This study investigates how transcriptional aberrations in adenocarcinoma cells at the early stage define the clinical phenotypes of adenocarcinoma tumors at the advanced stage. EXPERIMENTAL  DESIGN: We comprehensively searched for differentially expressed genes between preinvasive and invasive cancer cells in one minimally invasive adenocarcinoma using laser capture microdissection and DNA microarrays. We screened expression of candidate genes in 11 minimally invasive adenocarcinomas by reverse transcriptase PCR and examined their involvement in preinvasive-to-invasive progression by transfection studies. We then immunohistochemically investigated the presence of candidate molecules in 64 samples of advanced adenocarcinoma and  statistically analyzed the findings, together with clinicopathologic variables. RESULTS: The transcription factors Notch2 and Six1 were upregulated in invasive cancer cells in all 11 minimally invasive adenocarcinomas. Exogenous Notch2 transactivated Six1 followed by Smad3, Smad4, and vimentin, and enlarged the nuclei of NCI-H441 lung epithelial cells. Immunochemical staining for the transcription factors was double positive in the invasive, but not in the lepidic growth component of a third of advanced Ads, and the disease-free survival rates  were lower in such tumors. CONCLUSIONS: Paired upregulation of Notch2 and Six1 is a transcriptional aberration that contributes to preinvasive-to-invasive adenocarcinoma progression by inducing epithelial-mesenchymal transition and nuclear atypia. This aberration persisted in a considerable subset of advanced adenocarcinoma and conferred a more malignant phenotype on the subset.CI  - (c)2011 AACR.
4904	Increased expression of the transcription/translation regulatory protein Y-box binding protein-1 (YB-1) is associated with cancer aggressiveness, particularly in breast carcinoma. Here we establish that YB-1 levels are elevated in invasive  breast cancer cells and correlate with reduced expression of E-cadherin and poor  patient survival. Enforced expression of YB-1 in noninvasive breast epithelial cells induced an epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) accompanied by enhanced  metastatic potential and reduced proliferation rates. YB-1 directly activates cap-independent translation of messenger RNAs encoding Snail1 and other transcription factors implicated in downregulation of epithelial and growth-related genes and activation of mesenchymal genes. Hence, translational regulation by YB-1 is a restriction point enabling coordinated expression of a network of EMT-inducing transcription factors, likely acting together to promote  metastatic spread.
4920	expression of Snail has been shown to mediate epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) of epithelial cells and carcinomas, characterized by morphological alterations with disappearance and appearance of E-cadherin and vimentin, respectively. Here, we show that ectopic expression of Snail in human epidermoid  carcinoma A431 cells (Snail/A431) induces the representative EMT, resulting in remarkable motile and invasive properties of the cells. expression of Wnt5a, its  receptor Ror2 and matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-2 is induced in Snail/A431, but  not in control A431 cells. Interestingly, suppressed expression of either Wnt5a or Ror2 in Snail/A431 cells results in the inhibition of in vitro cell motility and invasiveness, at least partly mediated by MMP-2, without affecting characteristics of EMT, i.e., mesenchymal morphology, and down- and up-regulations of E-cadherin and vimentin, respectively. We further show that endogenous Snail is required for sustained expression of Wnt5a, Ror2 and MMP-13 in human osteosarcoma SaOS-2 cells. The results indicate that expression of both  Wnt5a and Ror2 is induced during Snail-mediated EMT or malignant progression of cancer cells and that consequently activated Wnt5a-Ror2 signaling confers highly  motile and invasive properties on cancer cells. Thus, Wnt5a-Ror2 signaling can be a target of cancer therapies to prevent cancer cells from undergoing invasion and metastasis.CI  - (c) 2011 The Authors. Journal compilation (c) 2011 by the Molecular Biology Society of Japan/Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
4921	Discoidin domain receptor 2 (DDR2) is a collagen receptor that is expressed during epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), a cellular transformation that mediates many stages of embryonic development and disease. However, the functional significance of this receptor in EMT is unknown. Here we show that Transforming Growth Factor-beta1 (TGF-beta1), a common stimulator of EMT, promotes increased expression of type I collagen and DDR2. Inhibiting expression  of COL1A1 or DDR2 with siRNA is sufficient to perturb activity of the NF-kappaB and LEF-1 transcription factors and to inhibit EMT and cell migration induced by  TGF-beta1. Furthermore, knockdown of DDR2 expression with siRNA inhibits EMT directly induced by type I collagen. These data establish a critical role for type I collagen-dependent DDR2 signaling in the regulation of EMT.CI  - Copyright (c) 2011 International Society of Matrix Biology. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
5052	The epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT), which is induced by transforming  growth factor-beta1 (TGF-beta1), is an important event that allows cancer cells to obtain invasive and metastatic characteristics. Although human peroxiredoxin 1 (hPrx1) has been implicated in tumor progression (e.g., invasion and metastasis), little is known about the role of hPrx1 in the EMT process during tumorigenesis.  Here, we investigated the regulatory effect of hPrx1 during TGF-beta1-induced EMT in A549 lung adenocarcinoma cells. We observed that high hPrx1 levels downregulated E-cadherin expression, and low hPrx1 levels upregulated E-cadherin  expression, suggesting that the hPrx1 level may be correlated with EMT. Knockdown of hPrx1 significantly inhibited TGF-beta1-induced EMT and cell migration, whereas hPrx1 overexpression enhanced TGF-beta1-induced EMT and cell migration. In contrast to wild-type hPrx1, a peroxidase-inactive hPrx1 mutant (hPrx1-C51S) resulted in markedly increased E-cadherin expression. Moreover, hPrx1 regulated the expression of two E-cadherin transcriptional repressors, Snail and Slug. These findings provide new insight into the role of hPrx1 in regulating TGF-beta1-induced EMT.CI  - Copyright (c) 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
5058	The process of epithelial-mesenchymal transition plays a pivotal role in the conversion of early stage tumors into invasive malignancies, and has been shown to be regulated by the zinc finger phosphoprotein, Snail; however, no upstream signaling kinases have been shown to modulate Snail functions. Since the invasiveness of breast cancer cells is also influenced by p21-activated kinase 1  (Pak1) signaling, we investigated Pak1's potential mechanistic role in the regulation of Snail functions. We found for the first time that Pak1 promotes transcription repression activity of Snail from E-cadherin, occludin, and aromatase promoters. Pak1 regulates the repressor activity of Snail by phosphorylating on Ser(246). Pak1 phosphorylation of Snail supports Snail's accumulation in the nucleus as well as its repressor functions. A Ser(246)Ala substitution in Snail or Pak1 knockdown by short interference RNA blocked Pak1-mediated Snail phosphorylation, leading to increased cytoplasmic accumulation of Snail and attenuation of Snail repressor activity in breast cancer cells. The regulation of phosphorylation and function of Snail by Pak1 represents a novel mechanism by which a signaling kinase might contribute to the  process of epithelial-mesenchymal transition.
5076	Mature tubular epithelial cells in the adult kidney can undergo epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), a phenotypic change that is linked to the pathogenesis of renal interstitial fibrosis. EMT may be considered the reverse of mesenchymal-epithelial transition, which occurs during normal kidney development. The Wilms' tumor suppressor gene WT1 and the paired box 2 gene Pax2  are needed to induce mesenchymal-epithelial transition and play key roles in the  progression of nephrogenesis. However, until now, WT1 and Pax2 have not been tested for their direct involvement in the process of renal tubular EMT. In this  study, we explored the potential roles of WT1 and Pax2 in EMT that is induced in  the remnant kidney of rats following 5/6 nephrectomy. We also examined WT1 and Pax2 in cultured renal tubular epithelial (NRK52E) cells treated with interleukin-1alpha and investigated the effects of blocking EMT using RNA interference. We showed that WT1 and Pax2 were re-expressed in the EMT models, and these were accompanied by decreased expression of E-cadherin and increased expression of vimentin, Snail and alpha-smooth muscle actin. Silencing WT1 and Pax2 by RNA interference blocked the interleukin-1alpha-induced EMT in the NRK52E cells, as reflected in the suppression of alpha-SMA and Snail expression, the restoration of E-cadherin expression and normal cell morphology. Our experiments  suggested that the re-expression of WT1 and Pax2 in the tubular epithelial cells  plays important roles in the promotion of EMT, and there may be therapeutic value in silencing Pax2 and WT1 to prevent or reverse renal fibrosis.CI  - Copyright (c) 2011 S. Karger AG, Basel.
51053	Geminin is a multifunctional protein previously suggested to both maintain the bone morphogenetic protein inhibition required for neural induction and to control cell-cycle progression and cell fate in the early embryo. Since Geminin is required in the blastocyst on E3.5, we employed shRNA to examine its role during postimplantation development. Geminin knockdown inhibited the epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) required at gastrulation and neural crest delamination, resulting in anterior-posterior axis and patterning defects, while  overexpression promoted EMT at both locations. Geminin was negatively correlated  with expression of E-cadherin, which is critically involved in controlling epithelial architecture. In addition, Geminin expression level was correlated with Wnt signaling and expression of the Wnt target gene Axin2 and with Msx2, and negatively correlated with the expression of Bmp4 and Neurog1 in quantitative reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction analysis of RNAs from individual  embryos. These results suggest that in addition to patterning the early embryo, Geminin plays a previously unrecognized role in EMT via its ability to affect Wnt signaling and E-cadherin expression.
5110	AIM: Protein L-isoaspartyl O-methyltransferase (PIMT) regulates cell adhesion in  various cancer cell lines through activation of integrin alphav and the PI3K pathway. The epithelial mesenchymal transition (EMT) enables epithelial cells to  acquire the characteristics of mesenchymal cells, and to allow them to migrate for metastasis. Here, we examined the relationship between PIMT and EMT with attached or detached MDA-MB 231 cells. METHODS: Human breast cancer cell line MDA-MB-231 cells were maintained in a suspension on poly-HEMA in the presence or  absence of PIMT siRNA or ERK inhibitor PD98059. The mRNAs and proteins were analyzed using RT-PCR and immunoblotting, respectively. RESULTS: During cellular  incubation under detached conditions, PIMT, integrin alphav and EMT proteins, such as Snail, Slug and matrix metalloproteinase 2 (MMP-2), were significantly increased in correlation with the phosphorylation of ERK1/2. The ERK inhibitor PD98059 (25 mumol/L) strongly suppressed the expression of the proteins and PIMT. Interestingly, PIMT siRNA blocked the phosphorylation of ERK and the expression of the EMT proteins. Additionally, PIMT and ERK phosphorylation were both co-activated by treatment with TGF-beta (10 ng/mL) and TNF-alpha (10 ng/mL). CONCLUSION: A tight cross-regulation exists between ERK and PIMT in regards to their activation and expression during the EMT.
51176	epithelial mesenchymal transformation (EMT) of the medial edge epithelial (MEE) seam creates palatal confluence. This work aims to elucidate the molecular mechanisms by which TGFbeta3 brings about palatal seam EMT. We collected mRNA for PCR analysis from individual transforming MEE cells by laser microdissection techniques and demonstrated that TGFbeta3 stimulates lymphoid-enhancing factor 1  (LEF1) mRNA synthesis in MEE cells. We show with antisense beta-catenin oligonucleotides that up-regulated LEF1 is not activated by beta-catenin in palate EMT. We ruled out other TGFbeta3 targets, such as RhoA and MEK1/2 pathways, and we present evidence using dominant-negative Smad4 and dominant-negative LEF1 showing that TGFbeta3 uses Smads both to up-regulate synthesis of LEF1 and to activate LEF1 transcription during induction of palatal  EMT. When phospho-Smad2 and Smad4 are present in the nucleus, LEF1 is activated without beta-catenin. Our paper is the first to show that the Smad2,4/LEF1 complex replaces beta-catenin/LEF1 during activation of EMT in vivo by TGFbeta3.
5141	epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) has emerged as a critical event in the pathogenesis of organ fibrosis and cancer and is typically induced by the multifunctional cytokine transforming growth factor (TGF)-beta1. The present study was undertaken to evaluate the potential role of phosphodiesterases (PDEs)  in TGF-beta1-induced EMT in the human alveolar epithelial type II cell line A549. Stimulation of A549 with TGF-beta1 induced EMT by morphological alterations and by expression changes of the epithelial phenotype markers E-cadherin, cytokeratin-18, zona occludens-1, and the mesenchymal phenotype markers, collagen I, fibronectin, and alpha-smooth muscle actin. Interestingly, TGF-beta1 stimulation caused twofold increase in total cAMP-PDE activity, contributed mostly by PDE4. Furthermore, mRNA and protein expression demonstrated up-regulation of PDE4A and PDE4D isoforms in TGF-beta1-stimulated cells. Most importantly, treatment of TGF-beta1 stimulated epithelial cells with the PDE4-selective inhibitor rolipram or PDE4 small interfering RNA potently inhibited EMT changes in a Smad-independent manner by decreasing reactive oxygen  species, p38, and extracellular signal-regulated kinase phosphorylation. In contrast, the ectopic overexpression of PDE4A and/or PDE4D resulted in a significant loss of epithelial marker E-cadherin but did not result in changes of mesenchymal markers. In addition, Rho kinase signaling activated by TGF-beta1 during EMT demonstrated to be a positive regulator of PDE4. Collectively, the findings presented herein suggest that TGF-beta1 mediated up-regulation of PDE4 promotes EMT in alveolar epithelial cells. Thus, targeting PDE4 isoforms may be a novel approach to attenuate EMT-associated lung diseases such as pulmonary fibrosis and lung cancer.
51474	epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a crucial mechanism for the acquisition of migratory and invasive capabilities by epithelial cancer cells. By conducting quantitative proteomics in experimental models of human prostate cancer (PCa) metastasis, we observed strikingly decreased expression of EPLIN (epithelial protein lost in neoplasm; or LIM domain and actin binding 1, LIMA-1)  upon EMT. Biochemical and functional analyses demonstrated that EPLIN is a negative regulator of EMT and invasiveness in PCa cells. EPLIN depletion resulted in the disassembly of adherens junctions, structurally distinct actin remodeling  and activation of beta-catenin signaling. Microarray expression analysis identified a subset of putative EPLIN target genes associated with EMT, invasion  and metastasis. By immunohistochemistry, EPLIN downregulation was also demonstrated in lymph node metastases of human solid tumors including PCa, breast cancer, colorectal cancer and squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck. This  study reveals a novel molecular mechanism for converting cancer cells into a highly invasive and malignant form, and has important implications in prognosis and treating metastasis at early stages.
5155	Id1 (inhibitor of differentiation 1) is a member of the bHLH protein family. Consistent with its role in promoting proliferation and inhibiting differentiation, Id1 expression is low or negligible in normal prostate epithelial cells but is high in prostate cancer. Ectopic expression of Id1 in normal prostate epithelial cells could therefore provide a model for understanding early events involved in initiation of prostate cancer. Over-expression of Id1 immortalized but did not transform ventral prostate epithelial cells (Id1-RPE). Immortalization was associated with decreased Cdkn2a, Cdkn1a, androgen receptor and increased Tert expression. Gene expression profiling over successive doublings was used to identify transcriptomic changes involved during immortalization (Tieg, Jun, alpha actin, Klf10, Id2) and in maintaining the immortalized phenotype (Igfbp3, Igfbp5, Mmp2, Tgfb3). Network analysis indicated that Id1 promotes cancer/tumor morphology, cell cycle and epithelial to mesenchymal transition by influencing AP1, tnf, tgfbeta, PdgfBB and estradiol pathways. During immortalization, the expression of majority of differentially expressed genes reduced over progressive doublings suggesting a decline in transcriptional regulatory mechanisms. The associated molecular/gene expression profile of Id1-RPE cells provides an opportunity to understand the molecular pathways associated with prostate epithelial cell survival and proliferation.
5290	Acquisition of resistance to tamoxifen is a critical therapeutic problem in breast cancer patients. epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), where cells undergo a developmental switch from a polarized epithelial phenotype to a highly  motile mesenchymal phenotype, is associated with invasion and motility of cancer  cells. Here, we found that tamoxifen-resistant (TAMR)-MCF-7 cells had undergone EMT, as evidenced by mesenchymal-like cell shape, downregulation of basal E-cadherin expression, and overexpression of N-cadherin and vimentin, as well as  increased Snail transcriptional activity and protein expression. Given the roles  of glycogen synthase kinase (GSK)-3beta and nuclear factor (NF)-kappaB in Snail-mediated E-cadherin deregulation during EMT, we examined the role of these  signaling pathways in the EMT of TAMR-MCF-7 cells. Both Ser9-phosphorylated GSK-3beta (inactive form) and NF-kappaB reporter activity were increased in TAMR-MCF-7 cells, as was activation of the phosphatase and tensin homolog depleted on chromosome ten (PTEN)-phosphoinositide 3 (PI3)-kinase-Akt pathway. Pin1, a peptidyl-prolyl isomerase, was overexpressed in TAMR-MCF-7 cells, and Snail transcription and the expression of EMT markers could be decreased by Pin1  siRNA treatment. These results imply that Pin1 overexpression in TAMR-MCF-7 cells is involved in the EMT process via PTEN-PI3-kinase-Akt-GSK-3beta and/or GSK-3beta-NF-kappaB-dependent Snail activation, and suggest the potential involvement of Pin1 in EMT during breast cancer development.
5300	Acquisition of resistance to tamoxifen is a critical therapeutic problem in breast cancer patients. epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), where cells undergo a developmental switch from a polarized epithelial phenotype to a highly  motile mesenchymal phenotype, is associated with invasion and motility of cancer  cells. Here, we found that tamoxifen-resistant (TAMR)-MCF-7 cells had undergone EMT, as evidenced by mesenchymal-like cell shape, downregulation of basal E-cadherin expression, and overexpression of N-cadherin and vimentin, as well as  increased Snail transcriptional activity and protein expression. Given the roles  of glycogen synthase kinase (GSK)-3beta and nuclear factor (NF)-kappaB in Snail-mediated E-cadherin deregulation during EMT, we examined the role of these  signaling pathways in the EMT of TAMR-MCF-7 cells. Both Ser9-phosphorylated GSK-3beta (inactive form) and NF-kappaB reporter activity were increased in TAMR-MCF-7 cells, as was activation of the phosphatase and tensin homolog depleted on chromosome ten (PTEN)-phosphoinositide 3 (PI3)-kinase-Akt pathway. Pin1, a peptidyl-prolyl isomerase, was overexpressed in TAMR-MCF-7 cells, and Snail transcription and the expression of EMT markers could be decreased by Pin1  siRNA treatment. These results imply that Pin1 overexpression in TAMR-MCF-7 cells is involved in the EMT process via PTEN-PI3-kinase-Akt-GSK-3beta and/or GSK-3beta-NF-kappaB-dependent Snail activation, and suggest the potential involvement of Pin1 in EMT during breast cancer development.
5329	Hypoxia activates genetic programs that facilitate cell survival; however, in cancer, it may promote invasion and metastasis. In this study, we show that breast cancer cells cultured in 1.0% O(2) demonstrate changes consistent with epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). Snail translocates to the nucleus, and E-cadherin is lost from plasma membranes. Vimentin expression, cell migration, Matrigel invasion, and collagen remodeling are increased. Hypoxia-induced EMT is  accompanied by increased expression of the urokinase-type plasminogen activator receptor (uPAR) and activation of cell signaling factors downstream of uPAR, including Akt and Rac1. Glycogen synthase kinase-3beta is phosphorylated, and Snail expression is increased. Hypoxia-induced EMT is blocked by uPAR gene silencing and mimicked by uPAR overexpression in normoxia. Antagonizing Rac1 or phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase also inhibits development of cellular properties associated with EMT in hypoxia. Breast cancer cells implanted on chick chorioallantoic membranes and treated with CoCl(2), to model hypoxia, demonstrate increased dissemination. We conclude that in hypoxia, uPAR activates diverse cell signaling pathways that cooperatively induce EMT and may promote cancer metastasis.
5460	The stem cell-related transcription factor Oct4 regulates tumor proliferation and apoptosis, but its role in tumor migration and invasion is still undefined. Here, we compared Oct4 expression in MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 cells, two breast cancer cell lines with similar epithelial origins, but distinct invasive and metastatic characteristics. We found MCF-7 cells to express very high levels of Oct4, while  no obvious expression was detected in MDA-MB-231 cells. We then downregulated Oct4 expression using small interfering RNA (siRNA) to explore its effects on migration and invasion. Transwell assays showed that silencing Oct4 in MCF-7 cells improved their migration and invasion capabilities. Reverse-transcriptase PCR and western blots showed that E-cadherin expression decreased, and alpha-smooth muscle actin expression increased with Oct4 downregulation, which suggests that epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) occurred. A potent EMT stimulus, TGF-beta1, significantly inhibited Oct4 expression in both dose- and time course-dependent manners. Silencing Oct4 also upregulated expression of two  major components of store-operated Ca(2+) entry channels (SOCs), STIM1 and Orai1, and enhanced SOC-directed Ca(2+) influx. Silencing STIM1 blocked the Ca(2+) influx and rescued the EMT initiated by Oct4 downregulation. In conclusion, silencing Oct4 promotes invasion and metastasis in breast cancer cells by inducing EMT. This effect may be related to SOCs-directed enhancement of Ca(2+) influx.CI  - Copyright (c) 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
5468	Chronic renal failure (CRF) mainly results from kidney fibrosis. epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) occurs in stressed tubular epithelial  cells and contributes to renal fibrosis. Transforming growth factor-beta1 (TGF-beta1) has been shown to initiate and complete the whole EMT process. Peroxisome proliferators-activated receptor-gamma (PPAR-gamma) exerts anti-inflammatory, anti-fibrotic and vaculo-protective effects on different renal diseases. Telmisartan is a member of angiotensin II (Ang II) receptor blocker (ARB) family. Recent studies show that Telmisartan has a partial agonistic effect on PPAR-gamma. Therefore, we tested the hypothesis that Telmisartan reverses the  progression of induced EMT by TGF-beta1 in cultured human renal proximal tubular  epithelial (HK-2) cells. Cultured HK-2 cells were treated with TGF-beta1 (3 ng/ml), a combination of TGF-beta1 and Telmisartan (10-200 umol/L) and a combination of TGF-beta1, Telmisartan and GW9662, a PPAR-gamma antagonist for 48  hours. EMT was determined by quantitative real-time PCR analysis of E-cadherin (E-cad), Connective Tissue Growth Factor (CTGF) and PPAR-gamma transcript expression and immunocytochemical analysis of E-cad, alpha-Smooth Muscle Actin (alpha-SMA) and PPAR-gamma protein expression. TGF-beta1 induced phenotypic EMT in cultured HK-2 cell line via significantly reduced E-cad expression and significantly increased CTGF, alpha-SMA expression in association with the loss of epithelial morphology. Telmisartan reversed all EMT markers in a dose-dependent manner which was inhibited by PPAR antagonist GW9662. In the present study, it was suggested that Telmisartan attenuated TGF-beta1 induced EMT by agonistic activation of PPAR-gamma.
54778	mutations in TRPS1 cause tricho-rhino-pharyngeal syndrome (TRPS). Trps1 is essential for nephron development, acting downstream of Bmp7. Because Bmp7 counteracts epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and reverses chronic renal injury, we examined the function of Trps1 in renal fibrosis. Immunohistochemistry revealed Trps1 expression in proximal tubular epithelial cells of mice. Unilateral ureteral obstruction reduced mRNA and protein expression of Trps1 in wild-type and heterozygous Trps1-knockout (Trps1(+/-)) mice. Trps1 haploinsufficiency promoted tubulointerstitial fibrosis via increased phosphorylation of Smad3 and decreased Smad7 protein. In primary culture, Trps1 deficiency promoted TGF-beta1-mediated EMT in proximal tubule cells. Trps1(+/-)-derived cells had higher levels of phosphorylated Smad3, and TGF-beta1 induced a time-dependent decrease in Smad7 protein in wild-type and Trps1(+/-) kidneys. In addition, compared with wild-type cells, Trps1(+/-) cells had double  the amount of the E3 ubiquitin ligase Arkadia, and TGF-beta1 induced further Arkadia expression. Furthermore, knockdown of Arkadia inhibited TGF-beta1-induced EMT in Trps1(+/-) cells. Collectively, these data suggest that Trps1 haploinsufficiency enhances TGF-beta1-induced EMT and tubulointerstitial fibrosis by modulating the amount of Smad7 through Arkadia/ubiquitin-mediated degradation.
54810	An early event in heart valve formation is the epithelial-mesenchymal transformation (EMT) of a subpopulation of endothelial cells in specific regions  of the heart tube, the endocardial cushions. The Type III TGFbeta receptor (TGFbetaR3) is required for TGFbeta2- or BMP-2-stimulated EMT in atrioventricular endocardial cushion (AVC) explants in vitro but the mediators downstream of TGFbetaR3 are not well described. Using AVC and ventricular explants as an in vitro assay, we found an absolute requirement for specific TGFbetaR3 cytoplasmic  residues, GAIP-interacting protein, C terminus (GIPC), and specific Activin Receptor-Like Kinases (ALK)s for TGFbetaR3-mediated EMT when stimulated by TGFbeta2 or BMP-2. The introduction of TGFbetaR3 into nontransforming ventricular endocardial cells, followed by the addition of either TGFbeta2 or BMP-2, results  in EMT. TGFbetaR3 lacking the entire cytoplasmic domain, or only the 3C-terminal  amino acids that are required to bind GIPC, fails to support EMT in response to TGFbeta2 or BMP-2. Overexpression of GIPC in AVC endocardial cells enhanced EMT while siRNA-mediated silencing of GIPC in ventricular cells overexpressing TGFbetaR3 significantly inhibited EMT. Targeting of specific ALKs by siRNA revealed that TGFbetaR3-mediated EMT requires ALK2 and ALK3, in addition to ALK5, but not ALK4 or ALK6. Taken together, these data identify GIPC, ALK2, ALK3, and ALK5 as signaling components required for TGFbetaR3-mediated endothelial cell EMT.CI  - Copyright A(c) 2011. Published by Elsevier Inc.
54845	Alternative splicing achieves coordinated changes in post-transcriptional gene expression programmes through the activities of diverse RNA-binding proteins. epithelial splicing regulatory proteins 1 and 2 (ESRP1 and ESRP2) are cell-type-specific regulators of transcripts that switch splicing during the epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). To define a comprehensive programme of alternative splicing that is regulated during the EMT, we identified an extensive ESRP-regulated splicing network of hundreds of alternative splicing events within numerous genes with functions in cell-cell adhesion, polarity, and migration. Loss of this global ESRP-regulated epithelial splicing programme induces the phenotypic changes in cell morphology that are observed during the EMT. Components of this splicing signature provide novel molecular markers that can be used to characterize the EMT. Bioinformatics and experimental approaches revealed a high-affinity ESRP-binding motif and a predictive RNA map that governs their activity. This work establishes the ESRPs as coordinators of a complex alternative splicing network that adds an important post-transcriptional layer to the changes in gene expression that underlie epithelial-mesenchymal transitions during development and disease.
54910	BACKGROUND: The p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (p38 MAPK) is an important intracellular signal transduction pathway involved in TGF-beta1-induced epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). Sema4C, a member of the semaphorin family, was found to be essential for the activation of p38 MAPK. However, the role of Sema4C in promoting TGF-beta1-induced EMT is unclear. METHODS: Renal fibrosis was induced by 5/6 subtotal nephrectomy rat model. In vitro, Sema4C was  induced in human proximal tubular epithelial cells (HKC) by treatment with TGF-beta1, or was inhibited by siRNA or was over-expressed by Sema4C transfection. The selective p38 MAPK inhibitor, SB203580, was administered to inhibit the p38 pathway. The expression of Sema4C, the markers of EMT, p38 phosphorylation and fibronectin secretion were measured by western blotting, immunohistochemistry, immunocytochemistry or enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. RESULTS: The expression of Sema4C increased in HKC cells that were treated with TGF-beta1. Knockdown of Sema4C potently inhibited phosphorylation of p38 MAPK and reversed TGF-beta1-induced EMT. Over-expression of Sema4C via Sema4C transfection elicited p38 MAPK phosphorylation and promoted EMT. The effects of Sema4C during  EMT were blocked by a p38-specific inhibitor. In vivo, the expression of Sema4C increased in the tubular epithelia of 5/6-nephrectomized rats and human fibrotic  renal tissue, and similar localization of phosphorylated p38 and Sema4C was demonstrated by immunohistochemistry on serial sections. CONCLUSIONS: Our findings suggest that Sema4C plays an important role in TGF-beta1-induced EMT through activation of p38 MAPK in proximal tubular epithelial cells.
554210	OBJECTIVE: Ovarian cancer (OC) is the most lethal of all gynecological malignancies primarily due to the sloughing-off of highly metastatic cells from primary tumors and their subsequent spread throughout the peritoneal cavity. Since the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) of OC cells located at the periphery of primary tumors is essential to this process, molecular interventions that can block EMT are of potential clinical significance. Members of the miR200  family of microRNAs have been implicated in EMT in other cancers. Our purpose was to determine if miR200 family microRNAs may be involved in EMT in OC and of potential therapeutic value in reducing OC metastasis. METHODS: Gene expression profiles of two OC cell lines with different metastatic potentials were monitored using qRT-PCR (quantitative reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction). The effect of over-expression of a miR-200 family microRNA (miR-429) in metastatic OC cells was monitored on molecular (qRT-PCR and microarray) and functional (morphology, migration, invasiveness and anchorage independence assays) levels. RESULTS: Molecular profiling of two OC cell lines with differing metastatic potentials identified significant differences in previously established epithelial and mesenchymal cell biomarkers including E-cadherin, ZEB1, ZEB2, miR-205 and miR-200 family microRNAs. Ectopic overexpression of miR-429, a member of the miR-200 family of microRNAs, in mesenchymal-like OC cells resulted in reversal of the mesenchymal phenotype (mesenchymal-epithelial transition, MET). CONCLUSIONS: Our results indicate that miR-429 may not only be a useful biomarker of EMT in ovarian cancer, but also of potential therapeutic value in abating OC metastasis.CI  - Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
5578	We have shown that Wnt5A increases the motility of melanoma cells. To explore cellular pathways involving Wnt5A, we compared gain-of-function (WNT5A stable transfectants) versus loss-of-function (siRNA knockdown) of WNT5A by microarray analysis. Increasing WNT5A suppressed the expression of several genes, which were re-expressed after small interference RNA-mediated knockdown of WNT5A. Genes affected by WNT5A include KISS-1, a metastasis suppressor, and CD44, involved in  tumor cell homing during metastasis. This could be validated at the protein level using both small interference RNA and recombinant Wnt5A (rWnt5A). Among the genes up-regulated by WNT5A was the gene vimentin, associated with an epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT), which involves decreases in E-cadherin, due to up-regulation of the transcriptional repressor, Snail. rWnt5A treatment increases Snail and vimentin expression, and decreases E-cadherin, even in the presence of  dominant-negativeTCF4, suggesting that this activation is independent of Wnt/beta-catenin signaling. Because Wnt5A can signal via protein kinase C (PKC),  the role of PKC in Wnt5A-mediated motility and EMT was also assessed using PKC inhibition and activation studies. Treating cells expressing low levels of Wnt5A  with phorbol ester increased Snail expression inhibiting PKC in cells expressing  high levels of Wnt5A decreased Snail. Furthermore, inhibition of PKC before Wnt5A treatment blocked Snail expression, implying that Wnt5A can potentiate melanoma metastasis via the induction of EMT in a PKC-dependent manner.
558	Human non-small cell lung cancers (NSCLCs) with activating mutations in EGFR frequently respond to treatment with EGFR-targeted tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs), such as erlotinib, but responses are not durable, as tumors acquire resistance. Secondary mutations in EGFR (such as T790M) or upregulation of the MET kinase are found in over 50% of resistant tumors. Here, we report increased activation of AXL and evidence for epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in  multiple in vitro and in vivo EGFR-mutant lung cancer models with acquired resistance to erlotinib in the absence of the EGFR p.Thr790Met alteration or MET  activation. Genetic or pharmacological inhibition of AXL restored sensitivity to  erlotinib in these tumor models. Increased expression of AXL and, in some cases,  of its ligand GAS6 was found in EGFR-mutant lung cancers obtained from individuals with acquired resistance to TKIs. These data identify AXL as a promising therapeutic target whose inhibition could prevent or overcome acquired  resistance to EGFR TKIs in individuals with EGFR-mutant lung cancer.
5581	Limited information is available concerning the expression and role of microRNAs  in prostate cancer. In this study, we investigated the involvement of miR-205 in  prostate carcinogenesis. Significantly lower miR-205 expression levels were found in cancer than in normal prostate cell lines as well as in tumor compared with matched normal prostate tissues, with a particularly pronounced reduction in carcinomas from patients with local-regionally disseminated disease. Restoring the expression of miR-205 in prostate cancer cells resulted in cell rearrangements consistent with a mesenchymal-to-epithelial transition, such as up-regulation of E-cadherin and reduction of cell locomotion and invasion, and in the down-regulation of several oncogenes known to be involved in disease progression (i.e., interleukin 6, caveolin-1, EZH2). Our evidence suggests that these events are driven by the concurrent repression of specific predicted miR-205 targets, namely N-chimaerin, ErbB3, E2F1, E2F5, ZEB2, and protein kinase  Cepsilon. Strikingly, the latter seemed to play a direct role in regulating epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition. In fact, its down-regulation led to a cell  phenotype largely reminiscent of that of cells ectopically expressing miR-205. Overall, we showed for the first time that miR-205 exerts a tumor-suppressive effect in human prostate by counteracting epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition and reducing cell migration/invasion, at least in part through the down-regulation of protein kinase Cepsilon.
55818	BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Intratumoral hypoxia affects every major aspect of cancer biology, but the relationship between hypoxia-induced genes and hepatocellular carcinoma has not been fully investigated. From a previously ranked microarray of hypoxia-inducible genes related to hepatocellular carcinoma, we focused on a histone H3 lysine 9 demethylase, known as Jumonji domain containing 1A. One function of this demethylase is to amplify hypoxia-inducible gene expression. We  hypothesized that the demethylase would be a significant marker of hepatocellular carcinoma. METHODS: We examined Jumonji domain containing 1A expression in 110 hepatocellular carcinoma samples with quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction and immunohistochemistry. We performed a small interfering RNA suppression analysis to determine the biological roles of the demethylase in proliferation, invasion, and the expression of epithelial-mesenchymal transition-related genes. RESULTS: The level of Jumonji domain containing 1A in cancer tissues was higher than in normal tissues (P < 0.0001). Protein expression was significantly related to gene expression (P < 0.0001). Samples with high Jumonji domain containing 1A expression (n = 47) had higher recurrence rates (P = 0.0006) than those with low expression. Multivariate Cox regression analysis revealed that Jumonji domain containing 1A expression was an independent predictor of recurrence (P = 0.0016), but was not significantly associated with any clinicopathological characteristics. Moreover, suppression of Jumonji domain  containing 1A expression in hepatocellular carcinoma cell lines under hypoxic conditions reduced cell growth inhibition, reduced invasion ability, and arrested epithelial-mesenchymal transitions. CONCLUSION: Jumonji domain containing 1A is a useful prognostic marker and may ameliorate malignant transformation in hepatocellular carcinoma.
55824	epithelial stem cells self-renew while maintaining multipotency, but the dependence of stem cell properties on maintenance of the epithelial phenotype is  unclear. We previously showed that trophoblast stem (TS) cells lacking the protein kinase MAP3K4 maintain properties of both stemness and epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). Here, we show that MAP3K4 controls the activity of the histone acetyltransferase CBP, and that acetylation of histones H2A and H2B by CBP is required to maintain the epithelial phenotype. Combined loss of MAP3K4/CBP activity represses expression of epithelial genes and causes TS cells to undergo EMT while maintaining their self-renewal and multipotency properties. The expression profile of MAP3K4-deficient TS cells defines an H2B acetylation-regulated gene signature that closely overlaps with that of human breast cancer cells. Taken together, our data define an epigenetic switch that maintains the epithelial phenotype in TS cells and reveals previously unrecognized genes potentially contributing to breast cancer.CI  - Copyright (c) 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
55914	epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) plays a crucial role in the progression of renal interstitial fibrosis, which finally leads to renal failure. Erbin, a member of LAP family, is recently reported to inhibit Smads and ERK pathway which are two important types of intracellular signaling involved in TGF-beta1-induced EMT. However, the role of Erbin in the regulation of EMT and the underlying mechanisms remain to be fully understood. To that end, we aimed to evaluate the expression of Erbin in renal interstitial fibrosis and the potential role of Erbin in tubular EMT stimulated by TGF-beta1. In this study we demonstrated that the expression of Erbin was upregulated in the tubular epithelia of 5/6-nephrectomized rats. We also showed here that TGF-beta1 upregulated Erbin expression in NRK52E cells during their EMT phenotype acquisition. Importantly, elevated expression of Erbin inhibited ERK signaling and partial reversed EMT stimulated by TGF-beta1. In the mean time, reducing Erbin expression enhanced ERK phosphorylation, promoted the E-cadherin suppression, and induced alpha-SMA expression and fibronection secretion in response to TGF-beta1, which could be rescued if cells were treated with the inhibitor of MEK1/2 U0126. However, in the absence of TGF-beta1, Erbin failed to  affect ERK activation and EMT process. These results suggest that Erbin is a negative feedback molecule induced by TGF-beta1 and inhibits TGF-beta1-induced EMT via ERK signaling pathway.
5594	In the developing heart, the epicardium is a major source of progenitor cells that contribute to the formation of the coronary vessel system. These epicardial  progenitors give rise to the different cellular components of the coronary vasculature by undergoing a number of morphological and physiological changes collectively known as epithelial to mesenchymal transformation (EMT). However, the specific signaling mechanisms that regulate epicardial EMT are yet to be delineated. In this study we investigated the role of TGFbeta2 and hyaluronan (HA) during epicardial EMT and how signals from these two molecules are integrated during this important process. Here we show that TGFbeta2 induces MEKK3 activation, which in turn promotes ERK1/2 and ERK5 phosphorylation. TGFbeta2 also increases Has2 expression and subsequent HA production. Nevertheless, inhibition of MEKK3 kinase activity, silencing of ERK5 or pharmacological disruption of ERK1/2 activation significantly abrogates this response. Thus, TGFbeta2 promotes Has2 expression and HA production through a MEKK3/ERK1/2/5-dependent cascade. Furthermore, TGFbeta2 is able to induce epicardial cell invasion and differentiation but not proliferation. However, inhibition of MEKK3-dependent pathways, degradation of HA by hyaluronidases or blockade of CD44, significantly impairs the biological response to TGFbeta2. Taken together, these findings demonstrate that TGFbeta2 activation of MEKK3/ERK1/2/5 signaling modulates Has2 expression and HA production leading to the induction of EMT events. This is an important and novel mechanism showing how TGFbeta2 and HA signals are integrated to regulate changes in epicardial cell behavior.CI  - Published by Elsevier Inc.
5595	In the developing heart, the epicardium is a major source of progenitor cells that contribute to the formation of the coronary vessel system. These epicardial  progenitors give rise to the different cellular components of the coronary vasculature by undergoing a number of morphological and physiological changes collectively known as epithelial to mesenchymal transformation (EMT). However, the specific signaling mechanisms that regulate epicardial EMT are yet to be delineated. In this study we investigated the role of TGFbeta2 and hyaluronan (HA) during epicardial EMT and how signals from these two molecules are integrated during this important process. Here we show that TGFbeta2 induces MEKK3 activation, which in turn promotes ERK1/2 and ERK5 phosphorylation. TGFbeta2 also increases Has2 expression and subsequent HA production. Nevertheless, inhibition of MEKK3 kinase activity, silencing of ERK5 or pharmacological disruption of ERK1/2 activation significantly abrogates this response. Thus, TGFbeta2 promotes Has2 expression and HA production through a MEKK3/ERK1/2/5-dependent cascade. Furthermore, TGFbeta2 is able to induce epicardial cell invasion and differentiation but not proliferation. However, inhibition of MEKK3-dependent pathways, degradation of HA by hyaluronidases or blockade of CD44, significantly impairs the biological response to TGFbeta2. Taken together, these findings demonstrate that TGFbeta2 activation of MEKK3/ERK1/2/5 signaling modulates Has2 expression and HA production leading to the induction of EMT events. This is an important and novel mechanism showing how TGFbeta2 and HA signals are integrated to regulate changes in epicardial cell behavior.CI  - Published by Elsevier Inc.
5598	epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) plays a crucial role in the development of cancer metastasis. The mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinases extracellular signal-regulated kinase, c-jun-NH(2)-kinase, and p38 have been implicated in promoting EMT, but a role for the MAP kinase BMK1 has not been studied. Here, we  report that BMK1 signaling suppresses EMT. BMK1 elevation augmented E-cadherin-mediated cell-cell adhesion, downregulated mesenchymal markers, and decreased cell motility. Conversely, BMK1 silencing attenuated E-cadherin-mediated cell-cell adhesion, upregulated mesenchymal markers, and stimulated cell motility. BMK1 depletion dramatically increased the accumulation  of endogenous Snail in the nuclear compartment. Snail accumulation was mediated by Akt/GSK3beta signaling, which was activated by a modulation in the expression  of the mTOR inhibitor DEPTOR. In support of these observations, BMK1 depletion promoted metastasis in vivo. Together, our findings reveal a novel mechanism of EMT control via mTOR/Akt inhibition that suppresses cancer metastasis.
5599	BACKGROUND: Peritoneal fibrosis is a serious complication in long-term peritoneal dialysis (PD) patients. epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) plays an important role in peritoneal fibrosis, and TGFbeta1 is the crucial inducer of EMT. Phosphorylation of Smad proteins is required for TGFbeta1-induced EMT. It was reported that C-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) was involved in the TGFbeta1/Smad signaling pathway and might regulate the activation of Smad proteins. However, whether JNK is activated by TGFbeta1 in rat peritoneal mesothelial cells (RPMCs)  and the role taken by JNK signaling in EMT induced by TGFbeta1 remains undetermined. In the present study, we investigated the role of JNK-Smad pathway  in EMT induced by TGFbeta1 in RPMCs. METHODS: We harvested RPMCs from the peritoneum of male Sprague-Dawley rats and then cultured the cells in Dulbecco modified Eagle medium/F12 medium with 15% (volume:volume) fetal bovine serum. The cells were pretreated with SP600125, a specific inhibitor of JNK, for 4 hours before incubation with TGFbeta1. The protein expression levels of phosphorylated  JNK, Smad2, and Smad3 were detected by Western blotting. The messenger RNA levels and protein expression of alpha-smooth muscle actin (alpha-SMA), E-cadherin, and  collagen I were determined with reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction and Western blotting respectively. RESULTS: expression of alpha-SMA and collagen  I were significantly increased and expression of E-cadherin decreased with TGFbeta1 in RPMCs. Transforming growth factor beta1 can stimulate phosphorylated  JNK expression from 5 minutes, with the peak at 10 minutes, and phosphorylated Smad2 and Smad3 expression from 10 minutes, with the peak at 30 minutes. The addition of SP600125, which blocked activation of JNK, effectively inhibited TGFbeta1-induced phosphorylation of Smad3, but not Smad2. Also, our results showed that SP600125 effectively suppressed TGFbeta1-induced high expression of alpha-SMA and collagen I, and prevented TGFbeta1-induced downregulation of E-cadherin expression in RPMCs. CONCLUSIONS: This study demonstrated that JNK signaling may play an important role in EMT induced by TGFbeta1 in RPMCs through  activation of Smad3, suggesting that JNK inhibitor may prove to be a novel therapeutic agent for peritoneal fibrosis.
5604	Metastasis of tumor cells is associated with epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT), which is a process whereby epithelial cells lose their polarity and acquire new features of mesenchyme. EMT has been reported to be induced by transforming growth factor-beta1 (TGF-beta1), but its mechanism remains elusive.  In this study, we performed a study to investigate whether PI3K/Akt and MAPK/Erk1/2 signaling pathways involved in EMT in the human lung cancer A549 cells. The results showed that after treated with TGF-beta1 for 48 h, A549 cells  displayed more fibroblast-like shape, lost epithelial marker E-cadherin and increased mesenchymal markers Vimentin and Fibronectin. Moreover, TGF-beta1-induced EMT after 48 h was accompanied by increased of cell migration and change of Akt and Erk1/2 phosphorylation. In addition, EMT was reversed by PI3K inhibitor LY294002 and MEK1/2 inhibitor U0126, which suggested that A549 cells under stimulation of TGF-beta1 undergo a switch into mesenchymal cells and  PI3K/Akt and MAPK/Erk1/2 signaling pathways serve to regulate TGF-beta1-induced EMT of A549 cells.
56288	epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a fundamental mechanism of organ fibrosis and the initial step is disruption of cell junction and cell polarity. TGF-beta has been demonstrated as the most important mediator of EMT which is sufficient to initiate and complete the whole course of EMT, however, the detailed mechanism of TGF-beta in modulating the disruption of cell junction still remains unclear. Par-3 is a component of Par complex which plays a crucial  role in the establishment and maintenance of epithelial polarity. In this study,  we found that TGF-beta treatment resulted in a dose- and time-dependent downregulation of Par-3 protein together with the suppression of E-cadherin expression and induction of alpha-SMA. The decreased Par-3 subsequently resulted  in the redistribution of Par-6-aPKC complex from cell membrane to cytoplasm. Forced expression of exogenous Par-3 into rat proximal epithelial cells (NRK52E)  led to a drastic blockage of TGF-beta1-induced E-cadherin suppression and alpha-SMA induction. In contrast, knockdown Par-3 expression by siRNA significantly enhanced TGF-beta1-induced E-cadherin suppression and alpha-SMA induction. These data indicate that downregulation of Par-3 and subsequent disruption of Par complex integrity might be one mechanism that TGF-beta destroys cell polarity during EMT.
5652	BACKGROUND: The glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI)-anchored epithelial extracellular membrane serine protease prostasin (PRSS8) is expressed abundantly  in normal epithelia and essential for terminal epithelial differentiation, but down-regulated in human prostate, breast, and gastric cancers and invasive cancer cell lines. Prostasin is involved in the extracellular proteolytic modulation of  the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) and is an invasion suppressor. The aim of this study was to evaluate prostasin expression states in the transitional cell carcinomas (TCC) of the human bladder and in human TCC cell lines. METHODS:  Normal human bladder tissues and TCC on a bladder cancer tissue microarray (TMA)  were evaluated for prostasin expression by means of immunohistochemistry. A panel of 16 urothelial and TCC cell lines were evaluated for prostasin and E-cadherin expression by western blot and quantitative PCR, and for prostasin gene promoter  region CpG methylation by methylation-specific PCR (MSP). RESULTS: Prostasin is expressed in the normal human urothelium and in a normal human urothelial cell line, but is significantly down-regulated in high-grade TCC and lost in 9 (of 15) TCC cell lines. Loss of prostasin expression in the TCC cell lines correlated with loss of or reduced E-cadherin expression, loss of epithelial morphology, and promoter DNA hypermethylation. Prostasin expression could be reactivated by demethylation or inhibition of histone deacetylase. Re-expression of prostasin or a serine protease-inactive variant resulted in transcriptional up-regulation of E-cadherin. CONCLUSION: Loss of prostasin expression in bladder transitional cell carcinomas is associated with epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), and may have functional implications in tumor invasion and resistance to chemotherapy.
5653	Human kallikrein-related peptidase 6 (KLK6) was cloned as a putative class II tumor suppressor based on its inactivated expression in metastatic breast cancer. Here, we investigated the mechanism(s) underlying the silencing of KLK6 gene in metastatic breast cancer and its putative implications for tumor progression. We  present evidence that tumor-specific loss of KLK6 expression is due to hypermethylation of specific CpGs located in the KLK6 proximal promoter. Methylation-dependent binding of methyl CpG-binding protein 2 and the formation of repressive chromatin mediated by localized histone deacetylation are critical  components of KLK6 silencing in breast tumors. Re-expression of KLK6 in nonexpressing MDA-MB-231 breast tumor cells by stable cDNA transfection resulted  in marked reversal of their malignant phenotype, manifested by lower proliferation rates and saturation density, marked inhibition of anchorage-independent growth, reduced cell motility, and their dramatically reduced ability to form tumors when implanted in severe combined immunodeficiency mice. Interestingly, inhibition of tumor growth was observed at physiologic concentrations of KLK6, but not when KLK6 was highly overexpressed, as observed in a subset of breast tumors. Differential proteomic profiling revealed that KLK6 re-expression results in significant down-regulation of vimentin which represents an established marker of epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition of tumor cells and  in concomitant up-regulation of calreticulin and epithelial markers cytokeratin 8 and 19, indicating that KLK6 may play a protective role against tumor progression that is likely mediated by inhibition of epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition. We suggest that KLK6 is an epigenetically regulated tumor suppressor in human breast cancer and provide ways of pharmacologic modulation.
56648	BACKGROUND AND AIMS: The authors have previously isolated a putative oncogene, eukaryotic initiation factor 5A2 (EIF5A2) from 3q26. In this study, EIF5A2 was characterised for its role in colorectal carcinoma (CRC) aggressiveness and underlying molecular mechanisms. METHODS: The expression dynamics of EIF5A2 were  examined by immunohistochemistry in a cohort of carcinomatous and non-neoplastic  colorectal tissues and cells. A series of in-vivo and in-vitro assays was performed to elucidate the function of EIF5A2 in CRC and its underlying mechanisms. RESULTS: The overexpression of EIF5A2 was examined by immunohistochemistry in 102/229 (44.5%) CRC patients, and it was significantly correlated with tumour metastasis and determined to be an independent predictor of shortened survival (p<0.05). Ectopic overexpression of EIF5A2 in CRC cells enhanced cell motility and invasion in vitro and tumour metastasis in vivo, and induced epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). The depletion of EIF5A2 expression prevented CRC cell invasiveness and inhibited EMT. Importantly, the metastasis-associated protein 1 (MTA1) gene was identified as a potential downstream target of EIF5A2 in CRC cells, and knockdown of MTA1 eliminated the augmentation of carcinoma cell migration, invasion and EMT by ectopic EIF5A2. The overexpression of EIF5A2 in CRC cells substantially enhanced the enrichment of c-myc on the promoter of MTA1, and MTA1 upregulation by EIF5A2 was partly dependent on c-myc. CONCLUSION: The data suggest that EIF5A2 plays an important oncogenic role in CRC aggressiveness by the upregulation of MTA1 to induce EMT, and EIF5A2 could be employed as a novel prognostic marker and/or effective therapeutic target for CRC.
56649	TMPRSS4 is a novel type II transmembrane serine protease that is highly expressed on the cell surface in pancreatic, thyroid and other cancer tissues, although its oncogenic significance and molecular mechanisms are unknown. Previously, we have  shown that TMPRSS4 promotes invasion, migration and metastasis of human tumor cells by facilitating an epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). In this study,  we explored the molecular basis underlying TMPRSS4-mediated effects. We show that multiple downstream signaling pathways, including focal adhesion kinase (FAK), extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK), Akt, Src and Rac1, are activated by  TMPRSS4 expression and that FAK signaling and ERK activation are required for TMPRSS4-induced invasiveness and EMT, including cadherin switch. Inhibition of PI3K or Src reduced invasiveness and actin rearrangement mediated by TMPRSS4 without restoring E-cadherin expression. Downregulation of E-cadherin was required for TMPRSS4-mediated effects but was not sufficient to induce EMT and invasion. TMPRSS4 induced integrin alpha5 expression and its signal transduction, leading to invasiveness and EMT accompanied by downregulation of E-cadherin. Functional blocking confirmed that integrin alpha5beta1 is a critical signaling molecule that is sufficient to induce TMPRSS4-mediated effects. Immunohistochemical analysis showed that TMPRSS4 expression was significantly higher in human colorectal cancer tissues from advanced stages than in that of early stage. Furthermore, upregulation of TMPRSS4 was correlated with enhanced integrin alpha5 expression. These observations implicate integrin alpha5 upregulation as a molecular mechanism by which TMPRSS4 induces invasion and contributes to cancer progression.
56998	The Wnt/beta-catenin pathway plays a critical role in cell proliferation and oncogenesis. To clarify the role of cytoplasmic accumulation of beta-catenin in oral squamous cell carcinoma (SCC), the cDNA of a mutant form of beta-catenin that lacks the entire region with the glycogen synthase kinase-3 beta (GSK-3beta)-specific phosphorylation site was transfected into Ca9-22 cells whose beta-catenin had been expressed predominantly at the membrane, and permanent cell lines expressing aberrant beta-catenin in the cytoplasm and nucleus were produced. These transfectants, C1 and C5, proliferated at similar rates to the parental Ca9-22 cells, but the cell morphology changed from polygonal to spindle-shaped and close cell-cell interaction was lost. These mutant beta-catenin-expressing cells exhibited a significantly higher invasion/migration capacity than wild-type Ca9-22 cells. The transcriptional activities of this mutant beta-catenin form was enhanced in these cells which could be demonstrated  by an elevated level of the transcription factor T-cell factor (Tcf)/lymphoid enhancer factor (Lef)-dependent reporter gene activity as well as by the up-regulation of Wnt/beta-catenin target gene matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-7. Moreover, we observed the redistribution of E-cadherin, the rearrangement of actin filaments, and the elevation of active Rho family members, Cdc42 and Rac. These results suggest that aberrant cytoplasmic accumulation of beta-catenin can  induce Tcf/Lef-mediated transcriptional activity, up-regulate MMP-7, and induce epithelial and mesenchymal transition (EMT). This would enhance the invasion and  migration of oral SCC cells.
57057	During early embryogenesis, the formation of the cardiac atrioventricular canal (AVC) facilitates the transition of the heart from a linear tube into a chambered organ. However, the genetic pathways underlying this developmental process are poorly understood. The T-box transcription factor Tbx20 is expressed predominantly in the AVC of early heart tube. It was shown that Tbx20 activates Nmyc1 and suppresses Tbx2 expression to promote proliferation and specification of the atrial and ventricular chambers, yet it is not known if Tbx20 is involved  in early AVC development. Here, we report that mice lacking Tbx20 in the AVC myocardium fail to form the AVC constriction, and the endocardial epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is severely perturbed. Tbx20 maintains expression of a variety of genes, including Bmp2, Tbx3 and Hand1 in the AVC myocardium. Intriguingly, we found Bmp2 downstream genes involved in the EMT initiation are also downregulated. In addition, re-expression of Bmp2 in the AVC  myocardium substantially rescues the EMT defects resulting from the lack of Tbx20, suggesting Bmp2 is one of the key downstream targets of Tbx20 in AVC development. Our data support a complex signaling network with Tbx20 suppressing  Tbx2 in the AVC myocardium but also indirectly promoting Tbx2 expression through  Bmp2. The spatiotemporal expression of Tbx2 in the AVC appears to be balanced between these two opposing signals. Overall, our study provides genetic evidence  that Tbx20 has essential roles in regulating AVC development that coordinate early cardiac chamber formation.CI  - Copyright (c) 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
57118	Breast cancer exhibits clinical and molecular heterogeneity, where expression profiling studies have identified five major molecular subtypes. The basal-like subtype, expressing basal epithelial markers and negative for estrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PR) and HER2, is associated with higher overall levels of DNA copy number alteration (CNA), specific CNAs (like gain on chromosome 10p), and poor prognosis. Discovering the molecular genetic basis of tumor subtypes may provide new opportunities for therapy. To identify the driver  oncogene on 10p associated with basal-like tumors, we analyzed genomic profiles of 172 breast carcinomas. The smallest shared region of gain spanned just seven genes at 10p13, including calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase ID (CAMK1D), functioning in intracellular signaling but not previously linked to cancer. By microarray, CAMK1D was overexpressed when amplified, and by immunohistochemistry exhibited elevated expression in invasive carcinomas compared to carcinoma in situ. Engineered overexpression of CAMK1D in non-tumorigenic breast epithelial cells led to increased cell proliferation, and  molecular and phenotypic alterations indicative of epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), including loss of cell-cell adhesions and increased cell migration and invasion. Our findings identify CAMK1D as a novel amplified oncogene linked to EMT in breast cancer, and as a potential therapeutic target with particular relevance to clinically unfavorable basal-like tumors.
5728	Loss of PTEN and loss of TP53 are common genetic aberrations occurring in prostate cancer. PTEN and TP53 contribute to the regulation of self-renewal and differentiation in prostate progenitors, presumptive tumor initiating cells for prostate cancer. Here we characterize the transformed phenotypes resulting from deletion of the Pten and TP53 tumor suppressors in prostate epithelium. Using the PB-Cre4(+)Pten(fl/fl)TP53(fl/fl) model of prostate cancer, we describe the histological and metastatic properties of primary tumors, transplanted primary tumor cells, and clonal cell lines established from tumors. Adenocarcinoma was the major primary tumor type that developed, which progressed to lethal sarcomatoid carcinoma at approximately 6 months of age. In addition, basal carcinomas and prostatic urothelial carcinomas were observed. We show that tumor  heterogeneity resulted, at least in part, from the transformation of multipotential progenitors. CK8+ luminal epithelial cells were capable of undergoing epithelial to mesenchymal transition in vivo to sarcomatoid carcinomas containing osseous metaplasia. Metastasis rarely was observed from primary tumors, but metastasis to lung and lymph nodes occurred frequently from orthotopic tumors initiated from a biphenotypic clonal cell line. Androgen deprivation influenced the differentiated phenotypes of metastases. These data show that one functional consequence of Pten/TP53 loss in prostate epithelium is  lineage plasticity of transformed cells.CI  - Published by Elsevier Inc.
5743	AIMS: Determination of prognostic parameters that are predictive of survival of gastric cancer (GC) may allow better identification of patients who could benefit from current chemotherapy regimens. To assess the correlation between tumour progression and epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), we assayed the expression levels of selected molecules involved in EMT [CD44, transforming growth factor (TGF)-alpha, cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2), matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-7, MMP-9 and C-X-C chemokine receptor (CXCR4)], and correlated these with overall patient survival (OS) and disease stage. METHODS AND RESULTS: Medical records and pathological biopsy results of 137 patients with GC were evaluated retrospectively. Spearman's correlation analysis showed that expression of CXCR4  was correlated significantly with the expression of all other proteins studied. In contrast, COX-2 expression correlated significantly with the expression of only MMP-7 (P = 0.011), MMP-9 (P = 0.015) and CXCR4 (P = 0.013). We observed significant negative correlations between OS and the expression of TGF-alpha (P = 0.017), COX-2 (P < 0.001), CXCR4 (P = 0.010), MMP-7 (P = 0.020) and MMP-9 (P = 0.015). On multivariate analysis, only COX-2 was an independent prognostic factor for OS [hazard ratio (HR) = 3.34; 95% confidence interval (CI): 1.43-9.75; P = 0.002). CONCLUSIONS: COX-2, TGF-alpha, MMP-7, MMP-9 and CXCR4 are associated with poor OS in gastric cancer.CI  - (c) 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
5744	epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is an important process that contributes  to renal fibrogenesis. TGF-beta1 and EGF stimulate EMT. Recent studies suggested  that parathyroid hormone-related protein (PTHrP) promotes fibrogenesis in the damaged kidney, apparently dependent on its interaction with vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), but whether it also interacts with TGF-beta and EGF to modulate EMT is unknown. Here, PTHrP(1-36) increased TGF-beta1 in cultured tubuloepithelial cells and TGF-beta blockade inhibited PTHrP-induced EMT-related  changes, including upregulation of alpha-smooth muscle actin and integrin-linked  kinase, nuclear translocation of Snail, and downregulation of E-cadherin and zonula occludens-1. PTHrP(1-36) also induced EGF receptor (EGFR) activation; inhibition of protein kinase C and metalloproteases abrogated this activation. Inhibition of EGFR activation abolished these EMT-related changes, the activation of ERK1/2, and upregulation of TGF-beta1 and VEGF by PTHrP(1-36). Moreover, inhibition of ERK1/2 blocked EMT induced by either PTHrP(1-36), TGF-beta1, EGF, or VEGF. In vivo, obstruction of mouse kidneys led to changes consistent with EMT and upregulation of TGF-beta1 mRNA, p-EGFR protein, and PTHrP. Taken together, these data suggest that PTHrP, TGF-beta, EGF, and VEGF might cooperate through activation of ERK1/2 to induce EMT in renal tubuloepithelial cells.
5747	Mouse embryonic cells isolated from focal adhesion kinase (FAK)-null animals at embryonic day 7.5 display multiple defects in focal adhesion remodeling, microtubule dynamics, mechanotransduction, proliferation, directional motility, and invasion. To date, the ability of FAK to modulate cell function has been ascribed largely to its control of posttranscriptional signaling cascades in this embryonic cell population. In this paper, we demonstrate that FAK unexpectedly exerts control over an epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) program that commits embryonic FAK-null cells to an epithelial status highlighted by the expression of E-cadherin, desmoplakin, and cytokeratins. FAK rescue reestablished the mesenchymal characteristics of FAK-null embryonic cells to generate committed mouse embryonic fibroblasts via an extracellular signal-related kinase- and Akt-dependent signaling cascade that triggered Snail1 gene expression and Snail1  protein stabilization. These findings indentify FAK as a novel regulator of Snail1-dependent EMT in embryonic cells and suggest that multiple defects in FAK(-/-) cell behavior can be attributed to an inappropriate commitment of these  cells to an epithelial, rather than fibroblastic, phenotype.
57496	epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a critical process occurring during embryonic development and in fibrosis and tumor progression. Dissociation of cell-cell contacts and remodeling of the actin cytoskeleton are major events of the EMT. Here, we show that myocardin-related transcription factors (MRTFs; also  known as MAL and MKL) are critical mediators of transforming growth factor beta (TGF-beta) 1-induced EMT. In all epithelial cell lines examined here, TGF-beta1 triggers the nuclear translocation of MRTFs. Ectopic expression of constitutive-active MRTF-A induces EMT, whereas dominant-negative MRTF-A or knockdown of MRTF-A and -B prevents the TGF-beta1-induced EMT. MRTFs form complexes with Smad3. Via Smad3, the MRTF-Smad3 complexes bind to a newly identified cis-element GCCG-like motif in the promoter region of Canis familiaris and the human slug gene, which activates slug transcription and thereby dissociation of cell-cell contacts. MRTFs also increase the expression levels of  actin cytoskeletal proteins via serum response factor, thereby triggering reorganization of the actin cytoskeleton. Thus, MRTFs are important mediators of  TGF-beta1-induced EMT.
57504	Estrogen receptor is a key regulator of proliferation and differentiation in mammary epithelia and represents a crucial prognostic indicator and therapeutic target in breast cancer. Mechanistically, estrogen receptor induces changes in gene expression through direct gene activation and also through the biological functions of target loci. Here, we identify the product of human MTA3 as an estrogen-dependent component of the Mi-2/NuRD transcriptional corepressor in breast epithelial cells and demonstrate that MTA3 constitutes a key component of  an estrogen-dependent pathway regulating growth and differentiation. The absence  of estrogen receptor or of MTA3 leads to aberrant expression of the transcriptional repressor Snail, a master regulator of epithelial to mesenchymal transitions. Aberrant Snail expression results in loss of expression of the cell  adhesion molecule E-cadherin, an event associated with changes in epithelial architecture and invasive growth. These results establish a mechanistic link between estrogen receptor status and invasive growth of breast cancers.
57591	epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a critical process occurring during embryonic development and in fibrosis and tumor progression. Dissociation of cell-cell contacts and remodeling of the actin cytoskeleton are major events of the EMT. Here, we show that myocardin-related transcription factors (MRTFs; also  known as MAL and MKL) are critical mediators of transforming growth factor beta (TGF-beta) 1-induced EMT. In all epithelial cell lines examined here, TGF-beta1 triggers the nuclear translocation of MRTFs. Ectopic expression of constitutive-active MRTF-A induces EMT, whereas dominant-negative MRTF-A or knockdown of MRTF-A and -B prevents the TGF-beta1-induced EMT. MRTFs form complexes with Smad3. Via Smad3, the MRTF-Smad3 complexes bind to a newly identified cis-element GCCG-like motif in the promoter region of Canis familiaris and the human slug gene, which activates slug transcription and thereby dissociation of cell-cell contacts. MRTFs also increase the expression levels of  actin cytoskeletal proteins via serum response factor, thereby triggering reorganization of the actin cytoskeleton. Thus, MRTFs are important mediators of  TGF-beta1-induced EMT.
5764	Regulation of the levels of tyrosine phosphorylation is essential to maintain the functions of proteins in different signaling pathways and other cellular systems, but how the steady-state levels of tyrosine phosphorylation are coordinated in different cellular systems to initiate complex cellular functions remains a formidable challenge. The receptor protein tyrosine phosphatase (RPTP)beta/zeta is a transmembrane tyrosine phosphatase whose substrates include proteins important in intracellular and transmembrane protein-signaling pathways, cytoskeletal structure, cell-cell adhesion, endocytosis, and chromatin remodeling. Pleiotrophin (PTN the protein and Ptn the gene) is a ligand for RPTPbeta/zeta; PTN inactivates RPTPbeta/zeta, leaving unchecked the continued endogenous activity of tyrosine kinases that increase phosphorylation of the substrates of RPTPbeta/zeta at sites dephosphorylated by RPTPbeta/zeta in cells not stimulated by PTN. Thus, through the regulation of the tyrosine phosphatase activity of RPTPbeta/zeta, the PTN/RPTPbeta/zeta signaling pathway coordinately regulates the levels of tyrosine phosphorylation of proteins in many cellular systems. We now demonstrate that PTN disrupts cytoskeletal protein complexes, ablates calcium-dependent homophilic cell-cell adhesion, stimulates ubiquitination and degradation of N-cadherin, reorganizes the actin cytoskeleton, and induces a morphological epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in PTN-stimulated U373 cells. The data suggest that increased tyrosine phosphorylation of the different substrates of RPTPbeta/zeta in PTN-stimulated cells alone is sufficient to coordinately stimulate the different functions needed for an EMT; it is possible that PTN initiates an EMT in cells at sites where PTN is expressed in development and in malignant cells that inappropriately express Ptn.
57669	EPB41L5 belongs to the band 4.1 superfamily. We investigate here the involvement  of EPB41L5 in epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) during mouse gastrulation.  EPB41L5 expression is induced during TGFbeta-stimulated EMT, whereas silencing of EPB41L5 by siRNA inhibits this transition. In EPB41L5 mutants, cell-cell adhesion is enhanced, and EMT is greatly impaired during gastrulation. Moreover, cell attachment, spreading, and mobility are greatly reduced by EPB41L5 deficiency. Gene transcription regulation during EMT occurs normally at the mRNA level; EPB41L5 siRNA does not affect either the decrease in E-cadherin or the increase in integrin expression. However, at the protein level, the decrease in E-cadherin and increase in integrin are inhibited in both EPB41L5 siRNA-treated NMuMG cells  and mutant mesoderm. We find that EPB41L5 binds p120ctn through its N-terminal FERM domain, inhibiting p120ctn-E-cadherin binding. EPB41L5 overexpression causes E-cadherin relocalization into Rab5-positive vesicles in epithelial cells. At the same time, EPB41L5 binds to paxillin through its C terminus, enhancing integrin/paxillin association, thereby stimulating focal adhesion formation.
5784	epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), crucial during embryogenesis for new tissue and organ formation, is also considered to be a prerequisite to cancer metastasis. We report here that the protein tyrosine phosphatase Pez is expressed transiently in discrete locations in developing brain, heart, pharyngeal arches,  and somites in zebrafish embryos. We also find that Pez knock-down results in defects in these organs, indicating a crucial role in organogenesis. Overexpression of Pez in epithelial MDCK cells causes EMT, with a drastic change  in cell morphology and function that is accompanied by changes in gene expression typical of EMT. Transfection of Pez induced TGFbeta signaling, critical in developmental EMT with a likely role also in oncogenic EMT. In zebrafish, TGFbeta3 is co- expressed with Pez in a number of tissues and its expression was  lost from these tissues when Pez expression was knocked down. Together, our data  suggest Pez plays a crucial role in organogenesis by inducing TGFbeta and EMT.
5803	Regulation of the levels of tyrosine phosphorylation is essential to maintain the functions of proteins in different signaling pathways and other cellular systems, but how the steady-state levels of tyrosine phosphorylation are coordinated in different cellular systems to initiate complex cellular functions remains a formidable challenge. The receptor protein tyrosine phosphatase (RPTP)beta/zeta is a transmembrane tyrosine phosphatase whose substrates include proteins important in intracellular and transmembrane protein-signaling pathways, cytoskeletal structure, cell-cell adhesion, endocytosis, and chromatin remodeling. Pleiotrophin (PTN the protein and Ptn the gene) is a ligand for RPTPbeta/zeta; PTN inactivates RPTPbeta/zeta, leaving unchecked the continued endogenous activity of tyrosine kinases that increase phosphorylation of the substrates of RPTPbeta/zeta at sites dephosphorylated by RPTPbeta/zeta in cells not stimulated by PTN. Thus, through the regulation of the tyrosine phosphatase activity of RPTPbeta/zeta, the PTN/RPTPbeta/zeta signaling pathway coordinately regulates the levels of tyrosine phosphorylation of proteins in many cellular systems. We now demonstrate that PTN disrupts cytoskeletal protein complexes, ablates calcium-dependent homophilic cell-cell adhesion, stimulates ubiquitination and degradation of N-cadherin, reorganizes the actin cytoskeleton, and induces a morphological epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in PTN-stimulated U373 cells. The data suggest that increased tyrosine phosphorylation of the different substrates of RPTPbeta/zeta in PTN-stimulated cells alone is sufficient to coordinately stimulate the different functions needed for an EMT; it is possible that PTN initiates an EMT in cells at sites where PTN is expressed in development and in malignant cells that inappropriately express Ptn.
58191	PURPOSE: This study was designed to identify novel and reliable serum prognostic  markers in patients with colorectal cancer (CRC). METHODS: Based on cytokine array analysis, we identified soluble CXCL16 as a novel prognostic serum marker.  Serum levels of CXCL16 were assessed in 314 CRC patients and 20 normal volunteers by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay, and their relationships with clinicopathologic findings, including survival, were investigated. Proliferation, invasion, and wound healing assays were used to investigate the biological role of soluble CXCL16 in CRC cells, by exposure of HT-29 cells to recombinant CXCL16. RESULTS: The median serum CXCL16 concentration in CRC patients was significantly  higher than that in normal volunteers. In addition, serum CXCL16 levels increased significantly in accordance with the progression of UICC stage classification. Elevated serum CXCL16 level was significantly associated with poor survival and was an independent prognostic marker in CRC patients. Furthermore, in stage I-III CRC patients who underwent curative intent surgery, elevated serum CXCL16 levels  were significantly associated with metachronous liver recurrence and poor survival. Recombinant soluble CXCL16 promoted the epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) phenotype characterized by impaired E-cadherin production and induction of vimentin in vitro. In addition, recombinant soluble CXCL16 promoted  cell growth, migration, and invasion in a CRC cell line. CONCLUSIONS: In this study, we identified CXCL16 as a novel prognostic marker. Preoperative high serum levels of CXCL16 were associated with metachronous liver recurrence and poor prognosis in CRC patients. Soluble CXCL16 may play an important role in liver metastases through the induction of EMT.
5879	Lung cancer is more deadly than colon, breast, and prostate cancers combined, and treatment improvements have failed to improve prognosis significantly. Here, we identify a critical mediator of lung cancer progression, Rac1b, a tumor-associated protein with cell-transforming properties that are linked to the matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-induced epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in lung epithelial cells. We show that expression of mouse Rac1b in lung epithelial  cells of transgenic mice stimulated EMT and spontaneous tumor development and that activation of EMT by MMP-induced expression of Rac1b gave rise to lung adenocarcinoma in the transgenic mice through bypassing oncogene-induced senescence. Rac1b is expressed abundantly in stages 1 and 2 of human lung adenocarcinomas and, hence, is an attractive molecular target for the development of new therapies that prevent progression to later-stage lung cancers.
5894	Aberrant activation of the Raf/MEK/MAPK pathway plays a key role in breast cancer development and progression. Dysregulation of Raf/MEK/MAPK oncogenic signaling often results from overexpression of the HER-2/Neu tyrosine kinase receptor leading to chemoendocrine resistance, development of distant metastases and ultimately poor prognosis in breast cancer patients. HER-2/Neu overexpression is  also linked to activation of the epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) pathway, loss of adhesion molecules and metastasis. Recently, it has been demonstrated that cancer cells that undergo EMT acquire a CD44+/CD24-/low basal cancer stem cell-like phenotype and are characterized by activation of HER-2/Neu  and TGFbeta oncogenic signaling pathways with increased capacity of self-renewal, drug resistance, invasion and distant metastases. Following metastatic dissemination, cancer cells re-activate certain epithelial properties through mesenchymal to epithelial transition (MET) to establish neoplastic lesions at secondary sites, although the molecular mechanisms regulating MET remain elusive. In this study we demonstrate that constitutive activation of Raf-1 oncogenic signaling induces HER-2/Neu overexpression leading to the development of distant  metastases in ERalpha+ MCF-7 breast cancer xenografts. Importantly, development of distant metastases in xenograft models was linked to activation of the MET pathway characterized by reduced expression of EMT inducer genes (TGFB2, TWIST1 and FOXC1) and overexpression of BMB7, CXCR7 and EGR family of transcription factors. In summary, our results demonstrate for the first time that amplification of Raf/MEK/MAPK oncogenic signaling during tumor growth promotes the genesis of metastatic lesions from primary tumors by activating the mesenchymal epithelial transition.
596	Evidence shows that Bcl-2 family members play a direct role in the development of some human malignancies. However, the mechanism by which Bcl-2 may influence tumor cell invasion and metastasis remains unclear. Ectopic overexpression of Bcl-2 in the human squamous carcinoma cell line HSC-3 enhanced tumorigenicity and experimental pulmonary metastasis. Interestingly, Bcl-2-expressing cells showed morphologic changes that resembled that of cells with an epithelial-mesenchymal transition phenotype. Analysis revealed increased N-cadherin and vimentin expression in parallel with attenuated E-cadherin level, along with enhanced migration and invasive behavior. Zymography studies confirmed elevated levels of  matrix metalloproteinase-9 (MMP-9) in media of Bcl-2-expressing cells. siRNA-mediated suppression of N-cadherin expression not only prevented the enhanced invasion but also blocked the increased MMP-9 expression induced by elevated Bcl-2 expression. Accordingly, pharmacologic inhibition of MMP-9 abrogated the increased tumor cell invasion. Furthermore, the Bcl-2-mediated increase in MMP-9 expression and tumor cell invasion was dependent on fibroblast  growth factor receptor-1 or extracellular signal-regulated kinase signaling. Collectively, the data establish that Bcl-2 overexpression in squamous carcinoma  cells induces a partial epithelial to mesenchymal transition that promotes not only survival but also invasion and metastasis through the N-cadherin/fibroblast  growth factor receptor/extracellular signal-regulated kinase pathway.
5962	Fibrosis of the lung is characterized by the accumulation of myofibroblasts, a key mediator in the fibrogenic reaction. Cumulative evidence indicates that epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), a process whereby epithelial cells become mesenchyme-like, is an important contributing source for the myofibroblast population. Underlying this phenotypical change is a dramatic alteration in cellular structure. The receptor for advanced glycation end-products (RAGE) has been suggested to maintain lung homeostasis by mediating cell adhesion, while the family of ezrin/radixin/moesin (ERM) proteins, on the other hand, serve as an important cross-linker between the plasma membrane and cytoskeleton. In the present investigation, we tested the hypothesis that RAGE and ERM interact and play a key role in regulating EMT-associated structural changes in alveolar epithelial cells. Exposure of A549 cells to inflammatory cytokines resulted in phosphorylation and redistribution of ERM to the cell periphery and localization  with EMT-related actin stress fibers. Simultaneously, blockade of Rho kinase (ROCK) signaling attenuated these cytokine-induced structural changes. Additionally, RAGE expression was diminished after cytokine stimulation, with release of its soluble isoform via a matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-9-dependent mechanism. Immunofluorescence microscopy and coimmunoprecipitation revealed association between ERM and RAGE under basal conditions, which was disrupted when challenged with inflammatory cytokines, as ERM in its activated state complexed with membrane-linked CD44. Dual-fluorescence immunohistochemistry of patient idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) tissues highlighted marked diminution of RAGE in fibrotic samples, together with enhanced levels of CD44 and double-positive cells for CD44 and phospho (p)ERM. These data suggest that dysregulation of the ERM-RAGE complex might be an important step in rearrangement of the actin cytoskeleton during proinflammatory cytokine-induced EMT of human alveolar epithelial cells.
598	Previous reports suggest that, in addition to its therapeutic effects, ionizing radiation (IR) increases the invasiveness of surviving cancer cells. Here, we demonstrate that this activity of IR in lung cancer cells is mediated by a signaling pathway involving p38 kinase, phosphoinositide 3-kinase, Akt, and matrix metalloproteinase (MMP-2). The invasion-promoting doses of IR also increased and reduced the levels of vimentin and E-cadherin, respectively, both of which are markers for the epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). Interestingly, all of these malignant actions of IR were mimicked by the overexpression of Bcl-X(L), a pro-survival member of the Bcl-2 family, in lung cancer cells. Moreover, both RNA and protein levels of Bcl-X(L) were elevated upon irradiation of the cells, and the prevention of this event using small-interfering RNAs of Bcl-X(L) reduced the ability of IR to promote invasion  signals and EMT-associated events. This suggests that Bcl-X(L) functions as a signaling mediator of the malignant effects of IR. It was also demonstrated that  IR enhances signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3) phosphorylation, and the reduction of STAT3 levels via RNA interference prevented IR-induced Bcl-X(L) accumulation, and thus all the tested Bcl-X(L)-dependent events. Overall, the data suggest that IR induces Bcl-X(L) accumulation via STAT3, which then promotes cancer cell invasion and EMT-associated markers. Our findings demonstrate a novel function of Bcl-X(L) in cancer, and also advance our understanding of the malignant actions of IR significantly.
5998	The Wnt beta-catenin pathway controls numerous cellular processes including cell  differentiation and cell-fate decisions. Wnt ligands engage Frizzled receptors and the low-density-lipoprotein-related protein 5/6 (LRP5/6) receptor complex leading to the recruitment of Dishevelled (Dvl) and Axin1 to the plasma membrane. Axin1 has a regulator of G-protein signaling (RGS) domain that binds adenomatous  polyposis coli and Galpha subunits, thereby providing a mechanism by which Galpha subunits can affect beta-catenin levels. Here we show that Wnt signaling enhances the expression of another RGS domain-containing protein, PDZ-RGS3. Reducing PDZ-RGS3 levels impaired Wnt3a-induced activation of the canonical pathway. PDZ-RGS3 bound GSK3beta and decreased its catalytic activity toward beta-catenin. PDZ-RGS3 overexpression enhanced Snail1 and led to morphological and biochemical  changes reminiscent of epithelial mesenchymal transition (EMT). These results indicate that PDZ-RGS3 can enhance signals generated by the Wnt canonical pathway and that plays a pivotal role in EMT.
6093	During early heart development at the looped heart stage, endothelial cells in the outflow tract and atrioventricular (AV) regions transform into mesenchyme to  generate endocardial cushion tissue. This endocardial epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is regulated by several regulatory pathways, including the transforming growth factor-beta (TGFbeta), bone morphogenetic protein (BMP), and  Rho-ROCK pathways. Here, we investigated the spatiotemporal expression pattern of ROCK1 mRNA during EMT in chick and examined whether TGFbeta or BMP could induce the expression of ROCK1. At the onset of EMT, ROCK1 expression was up-regulated in endothelial/mesenchymal cells. A three-dimensional collagen gel assay was used to examine the mechanisms regulating the expression of ROCK1. In AV endocardium co-cultured with associated myocardium, ROCK1 expression was inhibited by either  anti-TGFbeta3 antibody, anti-ALK2 antibody or noggin, but not SB431542 (ALK5 inhibitor). In cultured preactivated AV endocardium, TGFbeta3 protein induced the expression of ROCK1, but BMP did not. AV endothelial cells that were cultured in  medium supplemented with TGFbeta3 plus anti-ALK2 antibody failed to express ROCK1. These results suggest that the expression of ROCK1 is up-regulated at the  onset of EMT and that signaling mediated by TGFbeta3/ALK2 together with BMP is involved in the expression of ROCK1.CI  - (c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.
6275	BACKGROUND: Depletion of glomerular podocytes is an important feature of progressive diabetic nephropathy. Although the most plausible explanation for this podocyte depletion is detachment from the glomerular basement membrane after cellular apoptosis, the mechanism is unclear. Fibroblast-specific protein 1 (FSP1; encoded by the S100A4 gene) is a member of the S100 family of calcium-binding proteins and is constitutively expressed in the cytoplasm of tissue fibroblasts or epithelial cells converted into fibroblasts by means of epithelial-mesenchymal transition. STUDY DESIGN: Retrospective cross-sectional analysis. SETTINGS & PARTICIPANTS: 109 patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus, of whom 43 (39%) underwent kidney biopsy. PREDICTOR: Clinical stage (4 categories) and histological grade (5 categories) of diabetic nephropathy. OUTCOME: FSP1 expression in podocytes in urine and glomeruli in kidney biopsy specimens. MEASUREMENTS: Immunohistochemistry, real-time polymerase chain reaction, and in situ hybridization. RESULTS: 38 of 109 patients (35%) were normoalbuminuric, 16 (15%) had microalbuminuria, 8 (7%) had macroalbuminuria, and 47 (43%) had decreased kidney function. Approximately 95% of podocytes in urine sediment were  not apoptotic, and 86% expressed FSP1. The number of FSP1-positive podocytes in urine sediment was significantly larger in patients with macroalbuminuria than in those with normoalbuminuria (P = 0.03). Intraglomerular expression of FSP1 occurred almost exclusively in podocytes from patients with diabetes, and the number of FSP1-positive podocytes was larger in glomeruli showing diffuse mesangiopathy than in those showing focal mesangiopathy (P = 0.01). The number also was larger in glomeruli with nodular lesions than in those without nodular lesions (P < 0.001). FSP1-positive podocytes selectively expressed Snail1 and integrin-linked kinase, a known trigger for epithelial-mesenchymal transition. LIMITATIONS: Nonrepresentative study population. CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that the appearance of FSP1 in podocytes of patients with diabetes is associated with more severe clinical and pathological findings of diabetic nephropathy, perhaps because of induction of podocyte detachment through epithelial-mesenchymal transition-like phenomena.
6374	Prostate cancers that are resistant to hormone therapy are more invasive and have greater ability to spread to other organs than androgen-dependent prostate cancers. Furthermore, this type of prostate cancer is also highly resistant to current forms of chemotherapy. This study analyzed CXCL5/ENA78, which is highly expressed in androgen-independent prostate cancers, and is responsible for cell migration and epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition in two androgen-independent prostate cancer cell lines. Inducement of PC-3 and DU145 cancer progression by CXCL5/ENA78 is associated with increased Raf/MEK/ERK activation, and the upregulation of early growth response-1 (Egr-1) and Snail. Blockade of Egr-1 decreased Snail upregulation and cell migration, indicating that Egr-1 is required in CXCL5/ENA78-mediated Snail enhancement and cell migration. In addition, Egr-1 siRNA also decreased the effect of CXCL5/ENA78 on p27 inhibition, Cdk4 induction and cell proliferation, suggesting Egr-1 is also involved in CXCL5/ENA78-mediated cell growth. Moreover, blocking ERK1/2 by siRNA suppressed CXCL5/ENA78-induced Egr-1 enhancement, cell migration, and proliferation. Our study suggests that inhibition of CXCL5/ENA78-mediated ERK/Egr-1/Snail signaling  is an attractive therapeutic target for androgen-independent prostate cancer.CI  - Copyright (c) 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.
6382	The epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) of proximal tubular epithelial cells  (PTECs) into myofibroblasts contributes to the establishment of fibrosis that leads to end stage renal disease. FGF-2 induces EMT in PTECs. Because the interaction between FGF-2 and its receptor is mediated by heparan sulfate (HS) and syndecans, we speculated that a deranged HS/syndecans regulation impairs FGF-2 activity. Heparanase is crucial for the correct turnover of HS/syndecans. The aim of the present study was to assess the role of heparanase on epithelial-mesenchymal transition induced by FGF-2 in renal tubular cells. In human kidney 2 (HK2) PTEC cultures, although FGF-2 induces EMT in the wild-type clone, it is ineffective in heparanase-silenced cells. The FGF-2 induced EMT is through a stable activation of PI3K/AKT which is only transient in heparanase-silenced cells. In PTECs, FGF-2 induces an autocrine loop which sustains its signal through multiple mechanisms (reduction in syndecan-1, increase in heparanase, and matrix metalloproteinase 9). Thus, heparanase is necessary for FGF-2 to produce EMT in PTECs and to sustain FGF-2 intracellular signaling. Heparanase contributes to a synergistic loop for handling syndecan-1,  facilitating FGF-2 induced-EMT. In conclusion, heparanase plays a role in the tubular-interstitial compartment favoring the FGF-2-dependent EMT of tubular cells. Hence, heparanase is an interesting pharmacological target for the prevention of renal fibrosis.
6383	The epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is considered a key step in tumor progression, where the invasive cancer cells change from epithelial to mesenchymal phenotype. During this process, a decrease or loss in adhesion molecules expression and an increase in migration molecules expression are observed. The aim of this work was to determine the expression and cellular distribution of syndecan-1 and -2 (migration molecules) and E-cadherin and beta-catenin (adhesion molecules) in different stages of prostate cancer progression. A quantitative immunohistochemical study of these molecules was carried out in tissue samples from benign prostatic hyperplasia and prostate carcinoma, with low and high Gleason score, obtained from biopsies archives of the Clinic Hospital of the University of Chile and Dipreca Hospital. Polyclonal specific antibodies and amplification system of estreptavidin-biotin peroxidase and diaminobenzidine were used. Syndecan-1 was uniformly expressed in basolateral membranes of normal epithelium, changing to a granular cytoplasmatic expression pattern in carcinomas. Syndecan-2 was observed mainly in a cytoplasmatic granular pattern, with high immunostaining intensity in areas of low Gleason score. E-cadherin was detected in basolateral membrane of normal epithelia showing decreased expression in high Gleason score samples. beta-Catenin was found in cell membranes of normal epithelia changing its distribution toward the nucleus and cytoplasm in carcinoma samples. We concluded that changes in expression and cell distribution of E-cadherin and beta-catenin correlated with the progression  degree of prostate adenocarcinoma, suggesting a role of these molecules as markers of progression and prognosis. Furthermore, changes in the pattern expression of syndecan-1 and -2 indicate that both molecules may be involved in the EMT and tumor progression of prostate cancer.CI  - Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
6387	Stromal cell-derived factor 1alpha (SDF-1alpha) and its receptor CXCR4 have been  implicated in the tumorigenesis, proliferation, and lymph node metastasis of cancer. Here, we report that highly invasive squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) cells  with a spindle cell morphology show a strong expression of both SDF-1alpha and CXCR4. CXCR4 expression and cell migratory activity were further up-regulated by  treatment with SDF-1alpha or TGF-beta1 in these cells. When epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) was induced by Snail over-expression in SCC cells with an epithelial phenotype, an increased expression of SDF-1alpha was observed. Furthermore, SDF-1alpha and TGF-beta1 up-regulated the expression of CXCR4 and cell migratory activity in these cells. These results indicate that SDF-1alpha and CXCR4 expressions are possible markers of highly-invasive SCC and  regulated by EMT.
6440	Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress has been implicated in alveolar epithelial type II (AT2) cell apoptosis in idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. We hypothesized that ER stress (either chemically induced or due to accumulation of misfolded proteins) is also associated with epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in alveolar epithelial cells (AECs). ER stress inducers, thapsigargin (TG) or tunicamycin (TN), increased expression of ER chaperone, Grp78, and spliced X-box binding protein 1, decreased epithelial markers, E-cadherin and zonula occludens-1 (ZO-1), increased the myofibroblast marker, alpha-smooth muscle actin (alpha-SMA), and induced fibroblast-like morphology in both primary AECs and the  AT2 cell line, RLE-6TN, consistent with EMT. Overexpression of the surfactant protein (SP)-C BRICHOS mutant SP-C(DeltaExon4) in A549 cells increased Grp78 and  alpha-SMA and disrupted ZO-1 distribution, and, in primary AECs, SP-C(DeltaExon4) induced fibroblastic-like morphology, decreased ZO-1 and E-cadherin and increased alpha-SMA, mechanistically linking ER stress associated with mutant SP to fibrosis through EMT. Whereas EMT was evident at lower concentrations of TG or TN, higher concentrations caused apoptosis. The Src inhibitor, 4-amino-5-(4-chlorophenyl)-7-(t-butyl)pyrazolo[3,4]pyramidine) (PP2), abrogated EMT associated with TN or TG in primary AECs, whereas overexpression of SP-C(DeltaExon4) increased Src phosphorylation, suggesting a common mechanism. Furthermore, increased Grp78 immunoreactivity was observed in AT2 cells of mice after bleomycin injury, supporting a role for ER stress in epithelial abnormalities in fibrosis in vivo. These results demonstrate that ER stress induces EMT in AECs, at least in part through Src-dependent pathways, suggesting  a novel role for ER stress in fibroblast accumulation in pulmonary fibrosis.
6469	BACKGROUND: Lung cancer, especially non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is the major cause of cancer-related deaths in the United States. The aggressiveness of  NSCLC has been shown to be associated with the acquisition of epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT). The acquisition of EMT phenotype induced by TGF-beta1in several cancer cells has been implicated in tumor aggressiveness and resistance to conventional therapeutics; however, the molecular mechanism of EMT and tumor aggressiveness in NSCLC remains unknown. METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: In this study we found for the first time that the induction of EMT by chronic exposure of A549 NSCLC cells to TGF-beta1 (A549-M cells) led to the up-regulation of sonic hedgehog (Shh) both at the mRNA and protein levels causing activation of hedgehog signaling. These results were also  reproduced in another NSCLC cell line (H2030). Induction of EMT was found to be consistent with aggressive characteristics such as increased clonogenic growth, cell motility and invasion. The aggressiveness of these cells was attenuated by the treatment of A549-M cells with pharmacological inhibitors of Hh signaling in  addition to Shh knock-down by siRNA. The inhibition of Hh signaling by pharmacological inhibitors led to the reversal of EMT phenotype as confirmed by the reduction of mesenchymal markers such as ZEB1 and Fibronectin, and induction  of epithelial marker E-cadherin. In addition, knock-down of Shh by siRNA significantly attenuated EMT induction by TGF-beta1. CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Our results show for the first time the transcriptional up-regulation of Shh by TGF-beta1, which is mechanistically associated with TGF-beta1 induced EMT phenotype and aggressive behavior of NSCLC cells. Thus the inhibitors of Shh signaling could be useful for the reversal of EMT phenotype, which would inhibit  the metastatic potential of NSCLC cells and also make these tumors more sensitive to conventional therapeutics.
648	The polycomb group protein B lymphoma Mo-MLV insertion region 1 homolog (Bmi-1) is dysregulated in various cancers, and its upregulation strongly correlates with an invasive phenotype and poor prognosis in patients with nasopharyngeal carcinomas. However, the underlying mechanism of Bmi-1-mediated invasiveness remains unknown. In the current study, we found that upregulation of Bmi-1 induced epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and enhanced the motility and invasiveness of human nasopharyngeal epithelial cells, whereas silencing endogenous Bmi-1 expression reversed EMT and reduced motility. Furthermore, upregulation of Bmi-1 led to the stabilization of Snail, a transcriptional repressor associated with EMT, via modulation of PI3K/Akt/GSK-3beta signaling. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays revealed that Bmi-1 transcriptionally downregulated expression of the tumor suppressor PTEN in tumor cells through direct association with the PTEN locus. This in vitro analysis was consistent with the statistical inverse correlation detected between Bmi-1 and PTEN expression in a cohort of human nasopharyngeal carcinoma biopsies. Moreover, ablation of PTEN expression partially rescued the migratory/invasive phenotype of Bmi-1-silenced cells, indicating that PTEN might be a major mediator of Bmi-1-induced EMT. Our results provide functional and mechanistic links between the oncoprotein Bmi-1 and the tumor suppressor PTEN in the development and progression of cancer.
6493	The short splice variant of the basic helix-loop-helix Per-Arnt-Sim transcription factor Singleminded-2, SIM2s, has been implicated in development and is frequently lost or reduced in primary breast tumors. Here, we show that loss of Sim2s causes aberrant mouse mammary gland ductal development with features suggestive of malignant transformation, including increased proliferation, loss of polarity, down-regulation of E-cadherin, and invasion of the surrounding stroma. Additionally, knockdown of SIM2s in MCF-7 breast cancer cells contributed to an epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and increased tumorigenesis. In both Sim2(-/-) mammary glands and SIM2s-depleted MCF7 cells, these changes were associated with increased SLUG and MMP2 levels. SIM2s protein was detectable on the SLUG promoter, and overexpression of SIM2s repressed expression from a SLUG-controlled reporter in a dose-dependent manner. To our knowledge, SIM2s is the first protein shown to bind and repress the SLUG promoter, providing a plausible explanation for the development role and breast tumor-suppressive activity of SIM2s. Together, our results suggest that SIM2s is a key regulator of mammary-ductal development and that loss of SIM2s expression is associated with an invasive, EMT-like phenotype.
6495	epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) has a major role in cancer progression, as well as normal organ development and human pathology such as organ fibrosis and wound healing. Here, we performed a gene expression array specialized in EMT  of colorectal cancer (CRC). From a comprehensive gene expression analysis using epithelial- and mesenchymal-like CRC cell lines, and following the ontology (GO)  analysis, SIX1 gene was identified to be an EMT-related gene in CRC. Using SW480  cells stably transfected with a SIX1 expression construct and their control counterparts, we demonstrated that SIX1 overexpression represses CDH1 expression  and promotes EMT in CRC. SIX1-induced CDH1 repression and EMT in CRC cells were correlated at least in part with posttranscriptional ZEB1 activation and miR-200-family transcriptional repression. In primary tumors of CRC, in accord with the functional findings, aberrant expression of SIX1 in cancer cells was observed at the disruption of the basement membrane and at the tumor invasive front, where tumor cells underwent EMT in vivo. Taken together, SIX1 overexpression is suggested to occur in carcinogenesis, and contribute to repression of CDH1 expression and promotion of EMT partly through repression of miR-200-family expression and activation of ZEB1 in CRC.
650	Dysregulation of epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) may contribute to renal fibrogenesis. Our previous study indicated that bone morphogenetic protein-2 (BMP-2) significantly reversed transforming growth factor (TGF)-beta1-induced renal interstitial fibrosis. In this study, we examined the underlying mechanism and elucidate the regulation of EMT process under BMP-2 treatment. Cultured renal interstitial fibroblast (NRK-49F) was treated with TGF-beta1 (10 ng/ml) with or without BMP-2 (10-250 ng/ml) for 24 h. The expression of alpha-smooth muscle actin (alpha-SMA), E-cadherin, fibronectin, or  Snail transcriptional factors was analyzed by immunofluorescence staining or Western blotting. Cell migration was analyzed by wound-healing assay. NRK-49F treated with TGF-beta1 induced significant EMT including upregulatioin of alpha-SMA, fibronectin, and snail proteins and down-regulation of E-cadherin. Interestingly, co-treatment with BMP-2 dose-dependently reversed TGF-beta1-induced cellular fibrosis, cell migration, and above EMT change. The above effect was closely correlated with Snail since BMP-2 dose- and time-course  dependently induced a significant decrease in the level of Snail. Moreover, Snail siRNA significantly reversed TGF-beta1-induced increases in the level of alpha-SMA and fibronectin (intracellular and extracellular). We suppose that BMP-2 have the potential to attenuate TGF-beta1-induced renal interstitial fibrosis by attenuating Snail expression and reversing EMT process.CI  - Copyright (c) 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.
652	In our study, we found that bone morphogenetic protein 4 (BMP4) has a novel effect as an inducer of epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) on Panc-1 cells,  a human pancreatic carcinoma cell line. BMP4-treated Panc-1 cells showed loose cell contacts and a scattered, fibroblast-like appearance along with E-cadherin downregulation, Vimentin upregulation and enhanced cell migration, which are characteristic of EMT. BMP4 treatment also induced homeobox gene MSX2 expression, which we previously showed to be associated with EMT in pancreatic carcinoma cells. BMP4 treatment activated the Smad signaling pathway, and extracellular signal-related kinase (ERK) and p38 mitogen-activated kinase (MAPK) pathways in these cells. MSX2 was markedly induced by BMP4 through the ERK and p38 MAPK pathways in collaboration with the Smad signaling pathway. The repression of E-cadherin, induction of Vimentin and enhanced cell migration disappeared when siRNA-based MSX2 downregulated pancreatic cancer cells were treated with BMP4. These findings indicate that BMP4 may be involved in pancreatic carcinoma development through the promotion of EMT and that MSX2 is indispensable to this process.CI  - 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.
655	Ingestion of aristolochic acid (AA) is associated with the development of aristolochic acid nephropathy (AAN), which is characterized by progressive tubulointerstitial fibrosis, chronic renal failure and urothelial cancer. Our previous study showed that bone morphogenetic protein-7 (BMP-7) could attenuate AA-induced epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in human proximal tubule epithelial cells (PTEC). However, how gremlin (a BMP-7 antagonist) antagonizes the BMP-7 action in PTEC remained unsolved. The aim of the current study was to investigate the role of gremlin in AA-induced EMT in PTEC (HK-2 cells). HK-2 cells were treated with AA (10 mumol/L) for periods up to 72 h. Cell viability was determined by tetrazolium dye (MTT) assay. Morphological changes were assessed by phase-contrast microscopy. Markers of EMT, including E-cadherin and alpha-smooth muscle actin (alpha-SMA) were detected by indirect immunofluorescence stains. The BMP-7 and gremlin mRNA and protein expression in HK-2 cells were analyzed by quantitative real-time PCR (real-time RT-PCR) and western blotting after exposure to AA. The level of phosphorylated Smad1/5/8, a marker of BMP-7 activity, was also determined by western blot analysis. Cells were transfected with gremlin siRNA to determine the effects of gremlin knockdown on markers of EMT following treatment with AA. Our results indicated that AA-induced EMT was associated with acquisition of fibroblast-like cell shape, loss of E-cadherin, and increases of alpha-SMA and collagen type I. Interestingly, exposure of HK-2 cells to 10 mumol/L AA increased the mRNA and protein expression of gremlin in HK-2 cells. This increase was in parallel with a decrease in BMP-7 expression and a down-regulation of phosphorylated Smad1/5/8 protein levels. Moreover, transfection with siRNA to gremlin was able to recover  BMP-7 signaling activity, and attenuate EMT-associated phenotypic changes induced by AA. Together, these observations strongly suggest that gremlin plays a critical role in the modulation of reno-protective action of BMP, and that inhibition of gremlin will be a promising means of developmenting novel treatments for AAN.CI  - Copyright (c) 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.
6591	The epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a complex process that occurs during organogenesis and in cancer metastasis. Despite recent progress, the molecular pathways connecting the physiological and pathological functions of EMT need to be better defined. Here we show that the transcription factor Elf5, a key regulator of mammary gland alveologenesis, controls EMT in both mammary gland development and metastasis. We uncovered this role for Elf5 through analyses of Elf5 conditional knockout animals, various in vitro and in vivo models of EMT and metastasis, an MMTV-neu transgenic model of mammary tumour progression and clinical breast cancer samples. Furthermore, we demonstrate that Elf5 suppresses  EMT by directly repressing the transcription of Snail2, a master regulator of mammary stem cells and a known inducer of EMT. These findings establish Elf5 not  only as a key cell lineage regulator during normal mammary gland development, but also as a suppressor of EMT and metastasis in breast cancer.
6615	Aberrant activation of canonical Wingless-type MMTV integration site family (Wnt) signaling is pathognomonic of colorectal cancers (CRC) harboring functional mutations in either adenomatous polyposis coli or beta-catenin. Coincident with Wnt cascade activation, CRCs also up-regulate the expression of Wnt pathway feedback inhibitors, particularly the putative tumor suppressor, Axin2. Because Axin2 serves as a negative regulator of canonical Wnt signaling in normal cells,  recent attention has focused on the utility of increasing Axin2 levels in CRCs as a means to slow tumor progression. However, rather than functioning as a tumor suppressor, we demonstrate that Axin2 acts as a potent promoter of carcinoma behavior by up-regulating the activity of the transcriptional repressor, Snail1,  inducing a functional epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) program and driving metastatic activity. Silencing Axin2 expression decreases Snail1 activity, reverses EMT, and inhibits CRC invasive and metastatic activities in concert with global effects on the Wnt-regulated cancer cell transcriptome. The further identification of Axin2 and nuclear Snail1 proteins at the invasive front of human CRCs supports a revised model wherein Axin2 acts as a potent tumor promoter in vivo.
6624	Fascin, an actin-cross-linking protein, is up-regulated in breast cancer and correlates with a more aggressive disease. This study was conducted to elucidate  the effects of manipulating fascin in breast cancer cells on the metastasis-associated events, including proliferation, adhesion, invasion, epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and enrichment of a CD44(+) /CD24(-) subpopulation that show some stem/progenitor cell properties. Western blot analysis of a panel of breast cancer cell lines revealed high expression of fascin in MDA-MB-435 and MDA-MB-231 cells but revealed no or low expression in MDA-MB-453, Her-18 and T47D. Gain-of-function and loss-of-function studies in breast cancer cells demonstrated that forced expression of fascin promoted cell proliferation assessed by the MTT assay, decreased cellular adhesion to fibronectin and potentiated the invasive capacity in the Transwell chamber invasion assay. Conversely, down-regulation of fascin via small interfering RNA increased cell adhesion and facilitated cell proliferation and invasion. In addition, fascin participated in the EMT and modulated the proportion of the CD44(+) /CD24(-) subpopulation in breast cancer cells. In conclusion, our data highlight an important role for fascin in breast cancer progression in vitro through orchestrating a variety of cellular events associated with metastasis, and thus, targeting this gene might have therapeutic implications.CI  - Copyright (c) 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
6651	Vertebrate gastrulation is a critical step in the establishment of body plan. During gastrulation, epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) occurs. EMT is one of the central events of embryonic development, organ and tissue regeneration, and cancer metastasis. Signal transducers and activators of transcription (STATs) mediate biological actions such as cell proliferation, differentiation and survival in response to cytokines and growth factors, in a variety of biological  processes. STATs are also important in EMT during gastrulation, organogenesis, wound healing and cancer progression. We previously showed that STAT3 is activated in the organizer during zebrafish gastrulation and its activity is essential for gastrulation movements. The requirement for STAT3 is cell-autonomous for the anterior migration of gastrula organizer cells, and non-cell-autonomous for the convergence of neighbouring cells. The molecular mechanisms of STAT's action in EMT, however, are unknown. Here we identify LIV1,  a breast-cancer-associated zinc transporter protein, as a downstream target of STAT3 that is essential and sufficient for STAT3's cell-autonomous role in the EMT of zebrafish gastrula organizer cells. Furthermore, we demonstrate that LIV1  is essential for the nuclear localization of zinc-finger protein Snail, a master  regulator of EMT. These results establish a molecular link between STAT3, LIV1 and Snail in EMT.
6662	epithelial-mesenchymal transformation is a critical developmental process reiterated in multiple organs throughout embryogenesis. Formation of endocardial  cushions, primordia of valves and septa, is a classic example of epithelial-mesenchymal transformation. Several gene mutations are known to affect cardiac valve formation. Sox9 is activated when endocardial endothelial cells undergo mesenchymal transformation and migrate into an extracellular matrix, called cardiac jelly, to form endocardial cushions. In Sox9-null mutants, endocardial cushions are markedly hypoplastic. In these mutants, Nfatc1 is ectopically expressed and no longer restricted to endothelial cells. Further, Sox9-deficient endocardial mesenchymal cells fail to express ErbB3, which is required for endocardial cushion cell differentiation and proliferation. Our results reveal a succession of molecular steps in the pathway of endocardial cushion development. We propose that loss of Sox9 inhibits epithelial-mesenchymal transformation after delamination and initial migration, but before definitive mesenchymal transformation.
6667	epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a process implicated in tumor invasion, metastasis, embryonic development and wound healing. ZEB2 is a transcription factor involved in EMT that represses E-cadherin transcription. Although E-cadherin downregulation is a major event during EMT and tumor progression, E-cadherin reduction is probably not sufficient for full invasiveness. The mechanisms by which E-cadherin transcriptional repressors induce mesenchymal genes during EMT remain largely unknown. Here, we investigated the role of ZEB2 in the induction of integrin alpha5 during cancer EMT and its underlying mechanism. In human cancer cells, ZEB2 was found to directly upregulate integrin alpha5 transcription in a manner that is independent of the regulation of E-cadherin expression. Conversely, depletion of ZEB2 by small interfering RNA suppressed integrin alpha5 expression, leading to reduced invasion. Suppression of integrin alpha5 inhibited cancer cell invasion, suggesting an important role for integrin alpha5 in cancer progression. Furthermore, ZEB2 was found to activate the integrin alpha5 and vimentin promoters by interacting with and activating the transcription factor Sp1, suggesting that cooperation between ZEB2 and Sp1 represents a novel mechanism of  mesenchymal gene activation during EMT. These findings increase our understanding of the pathways beyond E-cadherin reduction that regulate mesenchymal gene expression during EMT and cancer progression.
6696	We previously reported that osteopontin (OPN), a matrix structural glycophosphoprotein, is upregulated in the injured mouse lens prior to the epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). Here, we investigated the role of this protein in EMT of the lens epithelium during wound healing. The crystalline lens  was injured by needle puncture in OPN-null (KO, n=40) and wild-type (WT, n=40) mice. The animals were killed at day 1, 2, 5, and 10 postinjury. Immunohistochemistry was employed to detect alpha-smooth muscle action (alphaSMA), a marker of EMT, collagen type I, transforming growth factor beta1 (TGFbeta1), TGFbeta2, and phospho-Smad2/3. Cell proliferation was assayed by examining uptake of bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU). The results showed that injury-induced EMT of mouse lens epithelium, as evaluated by histology, expression pattern of alphaSMA and collagen I, was altered in the absence of OPN  with reduced phospho-Smad2/3 signaling. Upregulation of TGFbeta1 and TGFbeta2 in  the epithelium was also inhibited. Cell proliferation was more active in KO mice  as compared with WT mice at day 1 and 2, but not at day 5 and 10. An in vitro experiment shows OPN facilitates cell adhesion of lens epithelial cell line. OPN  is required for activation of Smad2/3 signal in an injured lens epithelium and lens cell EMT.
6700	BACKGROUND/AIMS: Deficient biliary epithelial cell (BEC) expression of small proline-rich protein (SPRR) 2A in IL-6(-/-) mice is associated with defective biliary barrier function after bile duct ligation. And numerous gene array expression studies show SPRR2A to commonly be among the most highly up-regulated  genes in many non-squamous, stressed and remodeling barrier epithelia. Since the  function of SPRR in these circumstances is unknown, we tested the exploratory hypothesis that BEC SPRR2A expression contributes to BEC barrier function and wound repair. METHODS: The effect of SPRR2A expression was studied in primary mouse BEC cultures; in a BEC cell line after forced overexpression of SPRR2A; and in human livers removed at the time of liver transplantation. RESULTS: Forced SPRR2A overexpression showed that it functions as a SH3 domain ligand that increases resistance to oxidative injury and promotes wound restitution by enhancing migration and acquisition of mesenchymal characteristics. Low confluency non-neoplastic mouse BEC cultures show a phenotype similar to the stable transfectants, as did spindle-shaped BEC participating in atypical ductular reactions in primary biliary cirrhosis. CONCLUSIONS: These observations  suggest that SPRR2A-related BEC barrier modifications represent a novel, but widely utilized and evolutionarily conserved, response to stress that is worthy of further study.
6714	Both transforming growth factor (TGF)-ss and the non-receptor tyrosine kinase Src play major roles during tumorigenesis by regulating cell growth, epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT), migration/invasion and metastasis, but little is known about the signaling crosstalk between them. To interfere with Src function in vitro and in vivo many studies have employed the pharmacologic Src inhibitors PP2 and PP1. Both agents have recently been shown to be powerful inhibitors of TGF-ss receptor type I/ALK5 and type II. As this situation prohibited any definite conclusions with respect to the relative contribution of  TGF-ss vs. Src signaling, we decided to reappraise a potential role of Src in TGF-ss1-mediated cellular responses using RNA and dominant-negative (dn) interference to block Src expression and function, respectively. In TGF-ss-responsive pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) cells, we show that Src is activated by TGF-ss1 and that its specific inhibition strongly attenuated basal proliferation and enhanced TGF-ss1-mediated growth arrest. However, Src inhibition was unable to impair TGF-ss1-controlled EMT as evidenced by cell morphology and regulation of the epithelial marker E-cadherin. Despite its dispensibility for TGF-ss-induced EMT, specific inhibition of Src dramatically reduced basal and TGF-ss1-induced cell migration in Panc-1 cells as measured with a novel real-time migration assay (xCELLigence DP system). Biochemically, dnSrc inhibition failed to block TGF-ss1/ALK5-induced activation of Smad2 and Smad3, but partially inhibited transcriptional activation of TGF-ss/Smad-responsive reporter genes, and effectively blocked basal and TGF-ss1-induced activation of p38 MAPK. Together, the data provide evidence for a role of Src in the regulation of basal proliferation as well as in basal and TGF-ss1-mediated cell motility but not EMT in TGF-ss-responsive pancreatic (tumor) cells.
6722	The serum response factor (SRF) regulates the transcription of target genes by binding to serum response elements in dimeric form and by interacting with ternary complex factors. In this study, we have analyzed the role of the serum response factor and mechanisms that regulate its activity in tumor progression utilizing a multistage model of mouse skin carcinogenesis. We demonstrate elevated SRF DNA binding activity only in the cell lines that have undergone an epithelial to mesenchymal transition and have increased actin stress fiber formation. Transient transfection experiments of activated or dominant negative forms of RhoA showed that the high activity of SRF and the induced formation of actin stress fibers in cells with spindle morphology were mediated by RhoA signaling. A dominant negative form of SRF inhibited RhoA-induced actin polymerization and stress fiber formation. The DNA binding activity of SRF in mesenchymal tumor cells was also correlated with elevated expression of SRF target genes, similar to SRF itself, actin, and vinculin. These observations suggest for the first time that SRF may play an important role in tumor progression, specifically at the transition to an invasive metastatic stage of carcinogenesis.
673	Mice with thyroid-specific expression of oncogenic BRAF (Tg-Braf) develop papillary thyroid cancers (PTCs) that are locally invasive and have well-defined  foci of poorly differentiated thyroid carcinoma (PDTC). To investigate the PTC-PDTC progression, we performed a microarray analysis using RNA from paired samples of PDTC and PTC collected from the same animals by laser capture microdissection. Analysis of eight paired samples revealed a profound deregulation of genes involved in cell adhesion and intracellular junctions, with changes consistent with an epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). This was confirmed by immunohistochemistry, as vimentin expression was increased and E-cadherin lost in PDTC compared with adjacent PTC. Moreover, PDTC stained positively for phospho-Smad2, suggesting a role for transforming growth factor (TGF)beta in mediating this process. Accordingly, TGFbeta-induced EMT in primary  cultures of thyroid cells from Tg-Braf mice, whereas wild-type thyroid cells retained their epithelial features. TGFbeta-induced Smad2 phosphorylation, transcriptional activity and induction of EMT required mitogen-activated protein  kinase (MAPK) pathway activation in Tg-Braf thyrocytes. Hence, tumor initiation by oncogenic BRAF renders thyroid cells susceptible to TGFbeta-induced EMT, through a MAPK-dependent process.
6768	The epithelial-derived type II transmembrane serine protease epithin has been shown to be upregulated in a variety of cancer cell lines and tumor tissues, and  its upregulation correlates well with tumor progression in many cases. However, little is known regarding the regulation of its expression and the mechanism of its roles in tumor progression. Here, we show that transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta), a potent inducer of epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in tumor progression, upregulates epithin, and that epithin plays a critical role in TGF-beta-induced EMT. Forced overexpression of epithin induced EMT to exhibit characteristic morphological changes, alternations in EMT-related  proteins and enhanced cell motility. Conversely, shRNA-mediated knockdown of endogenous epithin inhibited TGF-beta-induced expression of mesenchymal markers and morphological changes. Furthermore, TGF-beta-induced cell migration and invasion were significantly impaired by epithin knockdown. In addition, we demonstrate that TGF-beta upregulates epithin transcriptionally via the Smad2/Smad4-mediated pathway. These results suggest that epithin is a key mediator of TGF-beta-induced EMT in tumor progression.CI  - Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
6774	The progression of colorectal carcinoma (CRC) to invasive and metastatic disease  may involve localized occurrences of epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). However, mechanisms of the EMT process in CRC progression are not fully understood. We previously showed that knockdown of signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3) up-regulated E-cadherin (a key component in  EMT progression) in CRC. In this study, we examined the roles of STAT3 in CRC EMT and ZEB1, an EMT inducer, in STAT3-induced down-regulation of E-cadherin. Knockdown of STAT3 significantly increased E-cadherin and decreased N-cadherin and vimentin expressions in highly invasive LoVo CRC cells. Meanwhile, overexpression of STAT3 significantly reduced E-cadherin and enhanced N-cadherin  and vimentin expressions in weakly invasive SW1116 CRC cells. Activation of STAT3 significantly increased CRC cell invasiveness and resistance to apoptosis. Knockdown of STAT3 dramatically enhanced chemosensitivity of CRC cells to fluorouracil. STAT3 regulated ZEB1 expression in CRC cells, and the STAT3-induced decrease in E-cadherin and cell invasion depended on activation of ZEB1 in CRC cells. Additionally, pSTAT3(Tyr-705) and ZEB1 expressions were significantly correlated with TNM (tumor, lymph node, and metastasis stages) (p < 0.01). In conclusion, STAT3 may directly mediate EMT progression and regulate ZEB1 expression in CRC. ZEB1 may participate in STAT3-induced cell invasion and E-cadherin down-regulation in CRC cells. The expressions of pSTAT3(Tyr-705) and ZEB1 may be positively associated with CRC metastasis. Our data may provide potential targets to prevent and/or treat CRC invasion and metastasis.
6776	Signal transducer and activator of transcription (Stat) 5 appears to play a vital role in prolactin (PRL)-induced cell differentiation and normal mammary gland development. We previously showed that PRL-activated Stat5a induced expression of E-cadherin-beta-catenin complex in vitro and in xenotransplant tumors in vivo led to inhibition of breast cancer invasion. In the present study, we show that human breast cancer cells co-overexpressing Stat5a and its tyrosine kinase (Jak) 2 cultured in three-dimensional (3D) Matrigel culture demonstrate changes consistent with induction of mesenchymal-epithelial redifferentiation. Jak2 and Stat5a-co-overexpressing cells treated with cocktail (PRL, dexamethasone, and insulin), effectively reverse epithelial-mesenchymal transition by stimulating 3D organoids more reminiscent of the acinar growth of normal mammary epithelial cells, compared with cells overexpressing only Stat5a or Jak2. In contrast, dominant-negative dominant-negative-Stat5 blocks 3D organoid formation, causing cells to grow in layers instead. Hyperactivation of Jak2 and Stat5a in T-47D cells induces alveolar-like structures, mamospheres, with marked lumen formation  through central apoptosis and restores a polarized epithelial phenotype. However, Jak2 and Stat5a overexpression in BT-20 cells induces partially differentiated 3D organoids with no central lumen, but effectively re-expresses estrogen receptor alpha. Jak2 and Stat5a-induced 3D differentiated organoids are accompanied by increased expression of E-cadherin, zonula occludens-1, and cytokeratins 8 and 18, and decreased levels of vimentin and Snail, indicating a shift from a mesenchymal phenotype toward an epithelial phenotype. Collectively, Jak2 and Stat5a co-overexpression cooperatively reverses epithelial-mesenchymal transition and promotes differentiation in human breast cancer cells, which may provide a mechanism to explain the invasive suppressor role of PRL-activated Stat5a in mammary cancer cells.
6777	PURPOSE: Signal transducer and activator of transcription 5 (STAT5) is activated  in squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck (SCCHN), where targeting of STAT5 inhibits tumor growth in vitro and in vivo. The role of STAT5 activation in carcinogenesis, tumor progression, and response to therapy remains incompletely understood. In this study, we investigated the effects of STAT5 activation on squamous epithelial carcinogenesis and response to therapy. EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN:  The functional consequences of STAT5 activation in squamous epithelial carcinogenesis were examined using cells derived from normal (Het-1A) and transformed mucosal epithelial cells engineered to express constitutive-active mutants of STAT5. RESULTS: The growth rate of stable clones derived from both normal and transformed squamous epithelial cells expressing the constitutive-active STAT5 was increased. In SCCHN xenografts, tumor volumes were  increased in constitutive-active STAT5 mutant cells compared with vector-transfected controls. Constitutive activation of STAT5 significantly increased cell migration and invasion through Matrigel, as well as the transforming efficiency of SCCHN cells in vitro, as assessed by soft agar assays. The constitutive-active STAT5 clones derived from SCCHN cells showed changes consistent with an epithelial-mesenchymal transition including decreased expression of E-cadherin and increased vimentin in comparison with control transfectants. In these cells, STAT5 activation was associated with resistance to cisplatin-mediated apoptosis and growth inhibition induced by the epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor, erlotinib. CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that constitutive STAT5 signaling enhances tumor growth, invasion, and epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition in squamous epithelial carcinogenesis and may contribute to resistance to epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor and chemotherapy.
6790	Mitotic serine/threonine kinase Aurora-A (Aur-A) plays a critical role in regulating centrosome segregation and spindle assemble. Aur-A overexpression causes excessive centrosome duplication and abnormal spindle structure, leading to tumor malignant progression. Here, we investigated Aur-A expression in nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) and the association between Aur-A and NPC invasiveness. We showed that overexpression of Aur-A in tumor tissues was correlated with cranial bone invasion and clinical stage in NPC patients. Suppression of Aur-A by either selective Aurora inhibitory VX-680 or small-interfering RNA caused G(2)/M arrest and apoptotic cell death in NPC CNE-2  cells. Significantly, inhibition of Aur-A suppressed CNE-2 cell invasion and restored membrane expression of epithelial markers, E-cadherin and beta-catenin,  suggesting a reversed epithelial-mesenchymal transition process in cancer cells.  In addition, we found that Aur-A-regulated epithelial-mesenchymal transition and  invasion were mediated by mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) phosphorylation. Moreover, suppression of MAP kinase by small-interfering RNA or  its upstream MEK1/2-selective inhibitor U0126 abrogated cell invasion enhanced by Aur-A overexpression. On the other hand, forced overexpression of constitutively  active form of MEK1/2, MEK2DD, in CNE-2 cancer cells rescued cell invasive ability suppressed by VX-680-imposed Aur-A inhibition. Our results indicated that Aur-A acted through a downstream MAP kinase pathway to promote epithelial-mesenchymal transition and invasiveness in nasopharyngeal tumorigenesis. Small chemical inhibitor VX-680 may offer as a promising molecular targeting agent in human NPC.
6794	The AKT/PI3K/mTOR pathway is frequently altered in a range of human tumours, including bladder cancer. Here we report the phenotype of mice characterised by deletion of two key players in mTOR regulation, Pten and Lkb1, in a range of tissues including the mouse urothelium. Despite widespread recombination within the range of epithelial tissues, the primary phenotype we observe is the rapid onset of bladder tumorigenesis, with median onset of approximately 100 days. Single deletion of either Pten or Lkb1 had no effect on bladder cell proliferation or tumour formation. However, simultaneous deletion of Lkb1 and Pten led to an upregulation of the mTOR pathway and the hypoxia marker GLUT1, increased bladder epithelial cell proliferation and ultimately tumorigenesis. Bladder tissue also exhibited characteristic features of epithelial-mesenchymal transition, with loss of the epithelial markers E-cadherin and the tight junction protein ZO-1, and increases in the mesenchymal marker vimentin as well as nuclear localization of epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) regulator Snail. We show  that these effects were all dependent upon mTOR activity, as rapamycin treatment  blocked both EMT and tumorigenesis. Our data therefore establish clear synergy between Lkb1 and Pten in controlling the mTOR pathway within bladder epithelium,  and show that loss of this control leads to the disturbance of epithelial structure, EMT and ultimately tumorigenesis.
6868	The activity of a variety of extracellular signaling factors is tightly regulated by proteins containing A Disintegrin And a Metalloprotease domain (ADAM) metalloproteases through limited proteolysis. Thus, the identification of ADAM substrates may unveil novel components and mechanisms of cell signaling pathways. We report the identification of the transmembrane protein vasorin (VASN), a transforming growth factor-beta (TGFbeta) trap, as a substrate of ADAM17. The metalloprotease efficiently generates a soluble fragment encompassing the extracellular domain of VASN. Despite the importance of TGFbeta in normal development and tumor progression, the regulation of VASN is completely unknown.  Here, we show that only the soluble form of VASN inhibits TGFbeta and that the secretion of VASN is tightly controlled by ADAM17. Hence, inhibition of ADAM17 leads to the upregulation of TGFbeta signaling. Adding a new level of complexity  to the function of ADAM17, we finally show that, through the cleavage of VASN, the metalloprotease controls TGFbeta-mediated epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition.
6885	Peritoneal fibrosis is a frequent complication of peritoneal dialysis following repeated low grade inflammatory and pro-fibrotic insults. This pathological process may lead to ultrafiltration failure and eventually to the discontinuing of the therapy. Fibrosis is linked to epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT)  of the peritoneal mesothelial cells, which acquire invasive and fibrogenic abilities. Here, we analyzed the role of the transforming growth factor-activated kinase-1 (TAK1) in the EMT of primary mesothelial cells from human peritoneum. The inhibition of TAK1 in mesenchymal-like mesothelial cells from the effluents of patients undergoing peritoneal dialysis led to the reacquisition of the apical to basolateral polarity, to increased expression of epithelial and to down-regulation of mesenchymal markers. TAK1 inhibition also resulted in decreased migratory/invasive abilities of effluent-derived mesothelial cells. Simultaneous inhibition of ERK1/2 and TAK1 pathways did not lead to an additive effect in the reacquisition of the epithelial phenotype. Inhibition of TAK1 also  blocked EMT in vitro and reduced the levels of PAI-1, which is involved in fibrosis and invasion. Analysis of signalling pathways downstream of TAK1 involved in EMT induction, showed that TAK1 inhibition reduced the transcriptional activity of NF-kappaB and Smad3, as well as the phosphorylation of c-jun, while enhancing Smad1-5-8 activity. These results demonstrate that TAK1 is a cross-point in a network including different pro-EMT transcription factors,  such as NF-kappaB, Snail, AP-1 and Smads. The identification of TAK1 as a main biochemical mediator of EMT and fibrosis in mesothelial cells from human peritoneum and the study of signalling pathways induced by its activity may be relevant in the design of new therapies aimed to counteract peritoneal fibrosis.
6909	Detachment of epithelial cells from matrix or attachment to an inappropriate matrix engages an apoptotic response known as anoikis, which prevents metastasis. Cellular sensitivity to anoikis is compromised during the oncogenic epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT), through unknown mechanisms. We report here a pathway through which EMT confers anoikis resistance. NRAGE (neurotrophin  receptor-interacting melanoma antigen) interacted with a component of the E-cadherin complex, ankyrin-G, maintaining NRAGE in the cytoplasm. Oncogenic EMT  downregulated ankyrin-G, enhancing the nuclear localization of NRAGE. The oncogenic transcriptional repressor protein TBX2 interacted with NRAGE, repressing the tumor suppressor gene p14ARF. P14ARF sensitized cells to anoikis;  conversely, the TBX2/NRAGE complex protected cells against anoikis by downregulating this gene. This represents a novel pathway for the regulation of anoikis by EMT and E-cadherin.
6925	In most carcinomas, invasion of malignant cells into surrounding tissues involves their molecular reprogramming as part of an epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition  (EMT). mutation of the APC gene in most colorectal carcinomas (CRCs) contributes  to the nuclear translocation of the oncoprotein beta-catenin that upon binding to T-cell and lymphoid enhancer (TCF-LEF) factors triggers an EMT and a proinvasive  gene expression profile. A key inducer of EMT is the ZEB1 transcription factor whose expression promotes tumorigenesis and metastasis in carcinomas. As inhibitor of the epithelial phenotype, ZEB1 is never present in the epithelium of normal colon or the tumor center of CRCs where beta-catenin remains membranous. We show here that ZEB1 is expressed by epithelial cells in intestinal tumors from human patients (familial adenomatous polyposis) and mouse models (APC(Min/+)) with germline mutations of APC that result in nuclear accumulation of beta-catenin. However, ZEB1 is not expressed in the epithelium of hereditary forms of CRCs that carry wild-type APC and where beta-catenin is excluded from the nucleus (Lynch syndrome). We found that beta-catenin/TCF4 binds directly to the ZEB1 promoter and activates its transcription. Knockdown of beta-catenin and  TCF4 in APC-mutated CRC cells inhibited endogenous ZEB1, whereas forced translocation of beta-catenin to the nucleus in APC-wild-type CRC cells induced de novo expression of ZEB1. Upregulation of MT1-MMP and LAMC2 by beta-catenin/TCF4 has been linked to invasiveness in CRCs, and we show here that  both proteins are activated by ZEB1 coexpressing with it in primary colorectal tumors with mutated APC. These results set ZEB1 as an effector of beta-catenin/TCF4 signaling in EMT and tumor progression.
6926	During the progression of head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC), the induction of an epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) program may play a critical role in the dissemination of cells from the primary tumor to distant metastatic foci. The process of EMT involves the activation of several important  genes and pathways to help maintain survival and growth and evolve into highly invasive and metastatic variants. In this study, expression microarray analysis identified a set of 145 upregulated genes in EMT-like HNSCC cells. Some of the strongly upregulated transcripts include genes that are reportedly involved in invasion and metastasis, such as DOCK10, LOX, ROBO1 and SRGN. Importantly, the Tbx3 gene, a member of the T-box transcription factor, was strongly upregulated in SCC cells displaying an EMT-like phenotype compared to cells with an epitheloid, non-EMT behavior. Tbx3 was also found to be strongly upregulated at the protein and gene expression level in an experimental model of snail-induced EMT cells. In addition, siRNA-induced Tbx3 depletion modestly suppressed cell invasion while enhancing Tbx3-mediated resistance to anoikis. Our findings provide evidence that Tbx3 overexpression promotes SCC cell survival displaying an EMT phenotype. This set of newly identified genes that are modulated during EMT-like conversion may be important diagnostic biomarkers during the process of  HNSCC progression.CI  - Published by Elsevier Inc.
6929	Several E-box-binding transcription factors regulate individual and collective cell migration and enhance the motility of epithelial cells by promoting epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). Here, we characterized the role of a subset of these transcription factors and the EMT proteome in branching morphogenesis of mammary epithelial tissues using a three-dimensional organotypic culture model of the mammary duct. We found that the transcription factors Snail1, Snail2, and E47 were transiently upregulated at branch sites; decreasing  the expression of these transcription factors inhibited branching. Conversely, ectopic expression of Snail1, Snail2, and E47 induced branching in the absence of exogenous stimuli. These changes correlated with the expression of mesenchymal markers and repression of E-cadherin, which was essential for branching. Snail1 and Snail2 also promoted cell survival at branch sites, but this was not sufficient to induce branching. These findings indicate that Snail1, Snail2, and  E47 can promote collective migration during branching morphogenesis of mammary epithelial tissues through key regulators of EMT.
6932	The Wnt/beta-catenin pathway plays a critical role in cell proliferation and oncogenesis. To clarify the role of cytoplasmic accumulation of beta-catenin in oral squamous cell carcinoma (SCC), the cDNA of a mutant form of beta-catenin that lacks the entire region with the glycogen synthase kinase-3 beta (GSK-3beta)-specific phosphorylation site was transfected into Ca9-22 cells whose beta-catenin had been expressed predominantly at the membrane, and permanent cell lines expressing aberrant beta-catenin in the cytoplasm and nucleus were produced. These transfectants, C1 and C5, proliferated at similar rates to the parental Ca9-22 cells, but the cell morphology changed from polygonal to spindle-shaped and close cell-cell interaction was lost. These mutant beta-catenin-expressing cells exhibited a significantly higher invasion/migration capacity than wild-type Ca9-22 cells. The transcriptional activities of this mutant beta-catenin form was enhanced in these cells which could be demonstrated  by an elevated level of the transcription factor T-cell factor (Tcf)/lymphoid enhancer factor (Lef)-dependent reporter gene activity as well as by the up-regulation of Wnt/beta-catenin target gene matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-7. Moreover, we observed the redistribution of E-cadherin, the rearrangement of actin filaments, and the elevation of active Rho family members, Cdc42 and Rac. These results suggest that aberrant cytoplasmic accumulation of beta-catenin can  induce Tcf/Lef-mediated transcriptional activity, up-regulate MMP-7, and induce epithelial and mesenchymal transition (EMT). This would enhance the invasion and  migration of oral SCC cells.
6935	Although the epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a normal process that occurs during development, it is thought to be associated with cancer progression and metastasis. Emerging evidence links mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) in the tumor microenvironment with the occurrence of EMT in cancer progression. In this  study, the human breast cancer cell line MCF7 was co-cultured with human adipose-derived MSCs (hAD-MSCs) in a transwell system. Co-cultured cells were analyzed for changes in cellular morphology, EMT markers, protein expression and  tumor characteristics. We found that co-cultured MCF7 cells underwent EMT and established a stable mesenchymal phenotype after prolonged co-culturing. Here, we demonstrate that paracrine transforming growth factor-beta1 (TGF-beta1) secreted  by hAD-MSCs regulated the establishment of EMT in MCF7 cells by targeting the ZEB/miR-200 regulatory loop. The downregulation of paracrine TGF-beta1 levels can inhibit and reverse the EMT progress by downregulating ZEB1/2 and upregulating miR-200b and miR-200c. The maintenance of a stable mesenchymal state by MCF7 cells required the establishment of autocrine TGF-beta signaling to drive and sustain ZEB expression, which had been initiated by the prolonged co-culturing with hAD-MSCs. These results suggest that MSCs may promote breast cancer metastasis by stimulating and facilitating the EMT process.
6943	The basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) family of transcription factors orchestrates cell-fate specification, commitment and differentiation in multiple cell lineages during development. Here, we describe the role of a bHLH transcription factor, Tcf21 (epicardin/Pod1/capsulin), in specification of the cardiac fibroblast lineage. In the developing heart, the epicardium constitutes the primary source of progenitor cells that form two cell lineages: coronary vascular smooth muscle  cells (cVSMCs) and cardiac fibroblasts. Currently, there is a debate regarding whether the specification of these lineages occurs early in the formation of the  epicardium or later after the cells have entered the myocardium. Lineage tracing  using a tamoxifen-inducible Cre expressed from the Tcf21 locus demonstrated that  the majority of Tcf21-expressing epicardial cells are committed to the cardiac fibroblast lineage prior to initiation of epicardial epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT). Furthermore, Tcf21 null hearts fail to form cardiac fibroblasts, and lineage tracing of the null cells showed their inability to undergo EMT. This is the first report of a transcription factor essential for the development of cardiac fibroblasts. We demonstrate a unique role for Tcf21 in multipotent epicardial progenitors, prior to the process of EMT that is essential for cardiac fibroblast development.
6997	One of the recent, significant advances in cancer immunotherapy is the identification of molecules as targets which regulate cell growth by induction of proliferation and survival signalling pathways. Among them, epidermal growth factor receptor and Her2 have been effectively targeted by monoclonal antibodies. Currently, the treatment of cancer has limitations and most cancer deaths result  from the local invasion and distant metastasis of tumour cells. An important insight for the understanding of tumour invasion and metastasis came from the recent discovery that the phenotypic changes of increased motility and invasiveness of cancer cells are reminiscent of the epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) that occurs during embryonic development. The human Cripto, a member of the epidermal growth factor-Cripto, Frl1, and Cryptic (EGF-CFC) protein family and a signalling protein during early embryonic development, plays an important role in cancers. Cripto is attached to the cell membrane through a glycosyl-phosphatidylinositol motif, and is upregulated in a wide range of epithelial cancers. In this paper the authors review the role of Cripto expression in tumourigenesis and in EMT to promote tumour invasion, with emphasis that the unique EGF-like region of Cripto plays a critical role in Cripto signalling-mediated tumour growth and EMT. Therefore, the region should be regarded as a therapeutic point for interruption of the oncogenic and metastatic  potential of Cripto for cancer immunotherapy.
7003	The TAZ transcription co-activator has been shown to promote cell proliferation and to induce epithelial-mesenchymal transition. Recently we have demonstrated that TAZ is phosphorylated and inhibited by the Hippo tumor suppressor pathway, which is altered in human cancer. The mechanism of TAZ-mediated transcription is  unclear. We demonstrate here that TEAD is a key downstream transcription factor mediating the function of TAZ. Disruption of TEAD-TAZ binding or silencing of TEAD expression blocked the function of TAZ to promote cell proliferation and to  induce epithelial-mesenchymal transition, demonstrating TEAD as a key downstream  effector of TAZ. We also identified CTGF, a gene that regulates cell adhesion, proliferation, and migration, as a direct target of TAZ and TEAD. Our study establishes a functional partnership between TAZ and TEAD under negative regulation by the Hippo signaling pathway.
7024	Fibronectins are cell-secreted glycoproteins that modulate cell attachment, spreading, migration, morphology, differentiation and oncogenic transformation. Fibronectin expression is activated during EMT (epithelial-mesenchymal transition) and is a hallmark of mesenchymal cells. It is shown in the present study that a transcription factor previously unrelated with EMT, TFCP2c/LSF/LBP-1c, was translocated to the nucleus and bound to the fibronectin promoter upon EMT induction by Snail1. Consequently, the interference of TFCP2c/LSF/LBP-1c's activity prevented fibronectin expression. Moreover, TFCP2c/LSF/LBP-1c was detected in nuclei of embryonic dermal mesenchymal cells adjacent to the hair bud, a cell population that expresses endogenous nuclear Snail1 and fibronectin. Therefore we indicate a new molecular role for TFCP2c/LSF/LBP-1c in fibronectin expression.
7039	AIMS: Determination of prognostic parameters that are predictive of survival of gastric cancer (GC) may allow better identification of patients who could benefit from current chemotherapy regimens. To assess the correlation between tumour progression and epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), we assayed the expression levels of selected molecules involved in EMT [CD44, transforming growth factor (TGF)-alpha, cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2), matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-7, MMP-9 and C-X-C chemokine receptor (CXCR4)], and correlated these with overall patient survival (OS) and disease stage. METHODS AND RESULTS: Medical records and pathological biopsy results of 137 patients with GC were evaluated retrospectively. Spearman's correlation analysis showed that expression of CXCR4  was correlated significantly with the expression of all other proteins studied. In contrast, COX-2 expression correlated significantly with the expression of only MMP-7 (P = 0.011), MMP-9 (P = 0.015) and CXCR4 (P = 0.013). We observed significant negative correlations between OS and the expression of TGF-alpha (P = 0.017), COX-2 (P < 0.001), CXCR4 (P = 0.010), MMP-7 (P = 0.020) and MMP-9 (P = 0.015). On multivariate analysis, only COX-2 was an independent prognostic factor for OS [hazard ratio (HR) = 3.34; 95% confidence interval (CI): 1.43-9.75; P = 0.002). CONCLUSIONS: COX-2, TGF-alpha, MMP-7, MMP-9 and CXCR4 are associated with poor OS in gastric cancer.CI  - (c) 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
7040	Chronic renal failure (CRF) mainly results from kidney fibrosis. epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) occurs in stressed tubular epithelial  cells and contributes to renal fibrosis. Transforming growth factor-beta1 (TGF-beta1) has been shown to initiate and complete the whole EMT process. Peroxisome proliferators-activated receptor-gamma (PPAR-gamma) exerts anti-inflammatory, anti-fibrotic and vaculo-protective effects on different renal diseases. Telmisartan is a member of angiotensin II (Ang II) receptor blocker (ARB) family. Recent studies show that Telmisartan has a partial agonistic effect on PPAR-gamma. Therefore, we tested the hypothesis that Telmisartan reverses the  progression of induced EMT by TGF-beta1 in cultured human renal proximal tubular  epithelial (HK-2) cells. Cultured HK-2 cells were treated with TGF-beta1 (3 ng/ml), a combination of TGF-beta1 and Telmisartan (10-200 umol/L) and a combination of TGF-beta1, Telmisartan and GW9662, a PPAR-gamma antagonist for 48  hours. EMT was determined by quantitative real-time PCR analysis of E-cadherin (E-cad), Connective Tissue Growth Factor (CTGF) and PPAR-gamma transcript expression and immunocytochemical analysis of E-cad, alpha-Smooth Muscle Actin (alpha-SMA) and PPAR-gamma protein expression. TGF-beta1 induced phenotypic EMT in cultured HK-2 cell line via significantly reduced E-cad expression and significantly increased CTGF, alpha-SMA expression in association with the loss of epithelial morphology. Telmisartan reversed all EMT markers in a dose-dependent manner which was inhibited by PPAR antagonist GW9662. In the present study, it was suggested that Telmisartan attenuated TGF-beta1 induced EMT by agonistic activation of PPAR-gamma.
7041	epithelial-mesenchymal transformation (EMT) in response to TGFbeta1 is a coordinated process of tissue morphogenesis that occurs during embryonic development as well as during certain pathologic events including kidney tubulointerstitial fibrosis. It is characterized by the disassembly of cell-cell  junctions and dramatic alterations in the actin cytoskeleton that facilitates cell-matrix adhesion and stimulates migration. The focal adhesion adapter protein, Hic-5, has previously been reported to be upregulated during TGFbeta1-induced EMT in mouse mammary epithelial cells and the current study recapitulates this result in both mouse kidney proximal tubule epithelial, MCT, cells and human mammary epithelial, MCF10A, cells. To evaluate a causative role for Hic-5 in EMT, Hic-5 RNA interference (siRNA) was used to prevent Hic-5 expression in response to TGFbeta1 stimulation and was shown to suppress cell migration and actin stress fiber formation. It also resulted in the retention of  a robust epithelial cell morphology characterized by elevated E-cadherin protein  expression and well-organized adherens junctions. In addition, Hic-5 siRNA treatment led to the suppression of TGFbeta1 induction of RhoA activation. In contrast, forced expression of Hic-5 led to the formation of ROCK-dependent actin stress fibers. Furthermore, the induction of Hic-5 expression in response to TGFbeta1 was shown to be a RhoA/ROCK I-dependent process. Together, these data implicate Hic-5 as a key regulator of EMT and suggest that RhoA stimulated Hic-5  expression in response to TGFbeta1 may be functioning in a feed forward mechanism whereby Hic-5 maintains the mesenchymal phenotype through sustained RhoA activation and signaling.
7042	epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), via activation of Wnt signaling, is prevailing in embryogenesis, but postnatally it only occurs in pathological processes, such as in tissue fibrosis and tumor metastasis. Our prior studies led us to speculate that EMT might be involved in the loss of limbal epithelial stem  cells in explant cultures. To examine this hypothesis, we successfully grew murine corneal/limbal epithelial progenitors by prolonging the culture time and by seeding at a low density in a serum-free medium. Single cell-derived clonal growth was accompanied by a gradient of Wnt signaling activity, from the center to the periphery, marked by a centrifugal loss of E-cadherin and beta-catenin from intercellular junctions, coupled with nuclear translocation of beta-catenin  and LEF-1. Large-colony-forming efficiency at central location of colony was higher than peripheral location. Importantly, there was also progressive centrifugal differentiation, with positive K14 keratin expression and the loss of p63 and PCNA nuclear staining, and irreversible EMT, evidenced by cytoplasmic expression of alpha-SMA and nuclear localization of S100A4; and by nuclear translocation of Smad4. Furthermore, cytoplasmic expression of alpha-SMA was promoted by high-density cultures and their conditioned media, which contained cell density-dependent levels of TGF-beta1, TGF-beta2, GM-CSF, and IL-1alpha. Exogenous TGF-beta1 induced alpha-SMA positive cells in a low-density culture, while TGF-beta1 neutralizing antibody partially inhibited alpha-SMA expression in a high-density culture. Collectively, these results indicate that irreversible EMT emerges in the periphery of clonal expansion where differentiation and senescence of murine corneal/limbal epithelial progenitors occurs as a result of  Smad-mediated TGF-beta-signaling.CI  - Copyright (c) 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
7043	During early heart development at the looped heart stage, endothelial cells in the outflow tract and atrioventricular (AV) regions transform into mesenchyme to  generate endocardial cushion tissue. This endocardial epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is regulated by several regulatory pathways, including the transforming growth factor-beta (TGFbeta), bone morphogenetic protein (BMP), and  Rho-ROCK pathways. Here, we investigated the spatiotemporal expression pattern of ROCK1 mRNA during EMT in chick and examined whether TGFbeta or BMP could induce the expression of ROCK1. At the onset of EMT, ROCK1 expression was up-regulated in endothelial/mesenchymal cells. A three-dimensional collagen gel assay was used to examine the mechanisms regulating the expression of ROCK1. In AV endocardium co-cultured with associated myocardium, ROCK1 expression was inhibited by either  anti-TGFbeta3 antibody, anti-ALK2 antibody or noggin, but not SB431542 (ALK5 inhibitor). In cultured preactivated AV endocardium, TGFbeta3 protein induced the expression of ROCK1, but BMP did not. AV endothelial cells that were cultured in  medium supplemented with TGFbeta3 plus anti-ALK2 antibody failed to express ROCK1. These results suggest that the expression of ROCK1 is up-regulated at the  onset of EMT and that signaling mediated by TGFbeta3/ALK2 together with BMP is involved in the expression of ROCK1.CI  - (c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.
7046	Endoglin is an accessory receptor for TGFbeta and can associate with Alk5 or Alk2. Although prior studies indicated that endoglin and Alk5 were not directly involved in epithelial-mesenchymal transformation (EMT) in the heart, the expression pattern of endoglin prompted a re-examination. We here show that loss  of endoglin expression mediated by either antisense DNA or siRNA results in a direct perturbation of EMT and reduced expression of EMT markers including slug,  runx2, RhoA, and latrophilin-2. An examination of BrdU incorporation shows that,  while endoglin regulates proliferation at an early stage, reduced endothelial cell proliferation does not account for the loss of mesenchyme. As Alk5 interacts with endoglin, we utilized siRNA and a specific inhibitor, HTS466284 (HTS), to perturb this receptor as well. Alk5 inhibition produced similar effects to the inhibition of endoglin. There was a reduction in mesenchymal cell formation and loss of EMT marker expression similar to that seen with endoglin. Alk5 kinase inhibition produced a similar loss of EMT marker expression but showed a contrasting upregulation of the proliferation and remodeling markers, Cyclin B2 and beta-catenin. Alk5 and endoglin both mediate endothelial cell proliferation in younger explants but, by stage 16, loss of endoglin no longer alters proliferation rates. These data show that both Alk5 and endoglin are directly involved in the process of EMT, that they interact with both TGFbeta-regulated activation and invasion pathways and that the roles of these receptors change during cardiac development.
7049	An early event in heart valve formation is the epithelial-mesenchymal transformation (EMT) of a subpopulation of endothelial cells in specific regions  of the heart tube, the endocardial cushions. The Type III TGFbeta receptor (TGFbetaR3) is required for TGFbeta2- or BMP-2-stimulated EMT in atrioventricular endocardial cushion (AVC) explants in vitro but the mediators downstream of TGFbetaR3 are not well described. Using AVC and ventricular explants as an in vitro assay, we found an absolute requirement for specific TGFbetaR3 cytoplasmic  residues, GAIP-interacting protein, C terminus (GIPC), and specific Activin Receptor-Like Kinases (ALK)s for TGFbetaR3-mediated EMT when stimulated by TGFbeta2 or BMP-2. The introduction of TGFbetaR3 into nontransforming ventricular endocardial cells, followed by the addition of either TGFbeta2 or BMP-2, results  in EMT. TGFbetaR3 lacking the entire cytoplasmic domain, or only the 3C-terminal  amino acids that are required to bind GIPC, fails to support EMT in response to TGFbeta2 or BMP-2. Overexpression of GIPC in AVC endocardial cells enhanced EMT while siRNA-mediated silencing of GIPC in ventricular cells overexpressing TGFbetaR3 significantly inhibited EMT. Targeting of specific ALKs by siRNA revealed that TGFbetaR3-mediated EMT requires ALK2 and ALK3, in addition to ALK5, but not ALK4 or ALK6. Taken together, these data identify GIPC, ALK2, ALK3, and ALK5 as signaling components required for TGFbetaR3-mediated endothelial cell EMT.CI  - Copyright A(c) 2011. Published by Elsevier Inc.
7052	Tissue transglutaminase (TG2), an enzyme involved in cell proliferation, differentiation and apoptosis is overexpressed in ovarian carcinomas, where it modulates epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and promotes metastasis. Its regulation in ovarian cancer (OC) remains unexplored. Here, we show that transforming growth factor (TGF)-beta, a cytokine involved in tumor dissemination is abundantly secreted in the OC microenvironment and induces TG2 expression and  enzymatic activity. This is mediated at transcriptional level by SMADs and by TGF-beta-activated kinase 1-mediated activation of the nuclear factor-kappaB complex. TGF-beta-stimulated OC cells aggregate as spheroids, which enable peritoneal dissemination. We show that TGF-beta-induced TG2 regulates EMT, formation of spheroids and OC metastasis. TG2 knock-down in OC cells decreases the number of cells harboring a cancer stem cell phenotype (CD44+/CD117+). Furthermore, CD44+/CD117+ cells isolated from human ovarian tumors express high levels of TG2. In summary, TGF-beta-induced TG2 enhances ovarian tumor metastasis by inducing EMT and a cancer stem cell phenotype.
7056	The expression of thrombomodulin (TM), a calcium-dependent adhesion molecule, is  frequently downregulated in various cancer types. However, the mechanism responsible for the low expression level of TM in tumorigenesis is unknown. Here, an inverse expression of TM and Snail was detected in different cancer cell lines. We further confirmed this inverse relation using the epithelial-mesenchymal transition cell model in HaCaT and A431 cells. We demonstrated that Snail suppressed TM expression by binding to E-box (CACCTG) in  TM promoter. Moreover, TM knockdown by short hairpin RNA disrupted E-cadherin-mediated cell junctions and contributed to tumorigenesis. In the calcium switch assay, E-cadherin lost the ability to associate with beta-catenin  and accumulated in cytoplasm in TM knockdown cells. Meanwhile, wound healing and  invasive assays showed that TM knockdown promoted cell motility. A subcutaneous injection of TM knockdown transfectants into immunocompromised mice induced squamous cell carcinoma-like tumors. Besides, forced expression of murine TM in TM knockdown cells made the cells reassume epithelium-like morphology and increased calcium-dependent association of E-cadherin and beta-catenin. In conclusion, TM, a novel downstream target of Snail in epithelial-mesenchymal transition, is required for maintaining epithelial morphology and functions as a  tumor suppressor.
7074	OBJECTIVE: To investigate the relationship between T lymphoma invasion and metastasis 1 (Tiam1) and epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in human colorectal carcinomas. METHODS: Tiam1, E-cadherin, CK, and vimentin expressions in normal colorectal epithelium, colorectal carcinomas (CRC) and CRC with lymphatic metastasis were determined by immunohistochemistry using a two-step method. RESULTS: Tiam1 expression was significantly higher in CRC than in normal  colorectal epithelium (P<0.01) in close correlation to the degree of tumor differentiation (P<0.05). Higher Tiam1 expression was detected in CRC with lymphatic metastasis than in primary CRC (P<0.05). The expressions of E-cadherin  and CK in CRC tissues were significantly lowered in comparison with those in normal colorectal epithelium (P<0.01), showing a correlation to tumor differentiation (P<0.01) but not to lymphatic metastasis. Vimentin was significantly overexpressed in CRC (P<0.01) and correlated to tumor differentiation (P<0.01) but not to lymphatic metastasis. Tiam1 expression was inversely correlated to E-cadherin and CK, but positively to vimentin. CONCLUSION: Tiam1 is related to the metastasis of colorectal carcinoma, and may induce EMT to promote CRC metastasis.
7076	Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and their endogenous inhibitors (TIMPs) regulate epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) critical for the development of epithelial organs as well as cancer cell invasion. TIMP-1 is frequently overexpressed in several types of human cancers and serves as a prognostic marker. The present study investigates the roles of TIMP-1 on the EMT process and formation of the lumen-like structure in a 3D Matrigel culture of MDCK cells. We  show that TIMP-1 overexpression effectively prevents cell polarization and acinar-like structure formation. TIMP-1 induces expression of the developmental EMT transcription factors such as SLUG, TWIST, ZEB1 and ZEB2, leading to downregulation of epithelial marker and upregulation of mesenchymal markers. Importantly, TIMP-1's ability to induce the EMT-like process is independent of its MMP-inhibitory domain. To our surprise, TIMP-1 induces migratory and invasive properties in MDCK cells. Here, we present a novel finding that TIMP-1 signaling  upregulates MT1-MMP and MMP-2 expression, and potentiates MT1-MMP activation of pro-MMP-2, contributing to tumor cell invasion. In spite of the fact that TIMP-1, as opposed to TIMP-2, does not interact with and inhibit MT1-MMP, TIMP-1 may act  as a key regulator of MT1-MMP/MMP-2 axis. Collectively, our findings suggest a model in which TIMP-1 functions as a signaling molecule and also as an endogenous inhibitor of MMPs. This concept represents a paradigm shift in the current view of TIMP-1/MT1-MMP interactions and functions during cancer development/progression.
7124	epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), characterized by loss of epithelial adhesion and gain of mesenchymal features, is an important mechanism to empower epithelial cells into the motility that occurs during embryonic development and recurs in cancer and fibrosis. Whether and how EMT occurs in wound healing and fibrosis in human skin remains unknown. In this study we found that migrating epithelial cells in wound margins and deep epithelial ridges had gained mesenchymal features such as vimentin and FSP1 expression. In hypertrophic scars, EMT-related genes were elevated along with inflammatory cytokines, indicating a causal relationship. To reconstitute EMT in vitro, normal human skin and primary  keratinocytes were exposed to cytokines such as tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha), resulting in expression of vimentin, FSP1, and matrix metalloproteinases. Moreover, TNF-alpha-induced EMT was impaired by antagonists against bone morphogen proteins (BMP) 2/4, suggesting that BMP mediates the TNF-alpha-induced EMT in human skin. Indeed, TNF-alpha could induce BMP-2 and its receptor (BMPR1A) in human skin and primary keratinocytes, and BMP2 could induce  EMT features in skin explants and primary keratinocytes. In summary, we uncovered EMT features in both acute and fibrotic cutaneous wound healing of human skin. Moreover, we propose that the mesenchymal induction in wound healing is motivated by TNF-alpha, in part, through induction of BMP.
7157	Snail1 is a zinc finger transcriptional repressor whose pathological expression has been linked to cancer cell epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) programs and the induction of tissue-invasive activity, but pro-oncogenic events capable of regulating Snail1 activity remain largely uncharacterized. Herein, we demonstrate that p53 loss-of-function or mutation promotes cancer cell EMT by de-repressing Snail1 protein expression and activity. In the absence of wild-type p53 function, Snail1-dependent EMT is activated in colon, breast, and lung carcinoma cells as a consequence of a decrease in miRNA-34 levels, which suppress Snail1 activity by binding to highly conserved 3' untranslated regions in Snail1  itself as well as those of key Snail1 regulatory molecules, including beta-catenin, LEF1, and Axin2. Although p53 activity can impact cell cycle regulation, apoptosis, and DNA repair pathways, the EMT and invasion programs initiated by p53 loss of function or mutation are completely dependent on Snail1  expression. These results identify a new link between p53, miR-34, and Snail1 in  the regulation of cancer cell EMT programs.
7161	p73 is expressed as TA and DeltaN isoforms, both of which are implicated in tumor suppression and/or promotion. To address how p73 possesses these opposing functions, we developed three-dimensional culture of MCF10A cells, which undergo  cell morphogenesis to form polarized spheroids with hollow lumen similar to normal mammary acini in vivo. Here, we showed that upon knockdown of p73, particularly TAp73 but not DeltaNp73, MCF10A cells formed irregular and near-normal acini without hollow lumen in three-dimensional culture. We also found that upon knockdown of p73 or TAp73, but not DeltaNp73, MCF10A cells underwent epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) via down-regulation of E-cadherin coupled with up-regulation of beta-catenin and laminin V. In addition, we found that Snail-1, Slug, and Twist, all of which are known to act as EMT inducers by repressing E-cadherin expression, were increased markedly upon knockdown of p73 and TAp73 but little if any by DeltaNp73. Furthermore, we showed that knockdown of p73 or TAp73 in MCF10A cells led to a marked increase in cell proliferation and migration. Together, our data suggest that TAp73 is necessary for maintaining normal cell polarity by suppressing EMT.
7227	Compared with the luminal subtype, the basal-like subtype of breast cancer has an aggressive clinical behavior, but the reasons for this difference between the two subtypes are poorly understood. We identified microRNAs (miRNAs) miR-221 and miR-222 (miR-221/222) as basal-like subtype-specific miRNAs that decrease expression of epithelial-specific genes and increase expression of mesenchymal-specific genes. In addition, expression of these miRNAs increased cell migration and invasion, which collectively are characteristics of the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT). The basal-like transcription factor FOSL1 (also known as Fra-1) directly stimulated the transcription of miR-221/222, and the abundance of these miRNAs decreased with inhibition of MEK (mitogen-activated or extracellular signal-regulated protein kinase kinase), placing miR-221/222 downstream of the RAS pathway. The miR-221/222-mediated reduction in E-cadherin abundance depended on their targeting of the 3' untranslated region (3'UTR) of TRPS1 (trichorhinophalangeal syndrome type 1), which is a member of the GATA family of transcriptional repressors. TRPS1 inhibited EMT by directly repressing expression of ZEB2 (Zinc finger E-box-binding homeobox 2). Therefore, miR-221/222 may contribute to the aggressive clinical behavior of basal-like breast cancers.
7291	Twist1 is a transcription factor that is involved in epithelial-mesenchymal transition by suppressing intercellular adhesion. In this study, we aimed to determine the role of Twist1 in the regulation of claudin-4 expression and investigate its specific mechanisms and clinical implications using human esophageal carcinoma cell lines and tissues. As a result, up-regulation of Twist1 decreased both gene and protein expression levels of endogenous claudin-4 and the suppression was mediated by direct binding of Twist1 to the canonical E-box in the promoter region of claudin-4. In addition, there was a significant inverse correlation of claudin-4 with Twist1 in esophageal cancer tissues. High Twist1 and low claudin-4 expression was associated with the poorest prognosis and was more highly correlated with adverse outcome than any other subgroup with statistical significance (p=0.001). Our results indicate that Twist1 induces the  repression of claudin-4 expression during the epithelial-mesenchymal transition in esophageal carcinoma.CI  - Copyright (c) 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
7421	SNAI1, ZEB1, E-cadherin (CDH1), and vitamin D receptor (VDR) genes regulate the epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) that initiates the invasion process of many tumor cells. We hypothesized that this process could also affect the behavior of normal cells adjacent to the tumor. To verify this hypothesis, the expression level of these genes was determined by quantitative RT-PCR in tumor, normal adjacent, and normal distant tissues from 32 colorectal cancer (CC) patients. In addition, we extended the study to human HaCaT normal keratinocytes  and SW480-ADH colon cancer cells co-cultured with SW480-ADH cells overexpressing  the mouse Snai1 gene. Of 18 CC cases with SNAI1 expression in tumor tissue, five  also had SNAI1 in normal adjacent tissue (NAT). expression of SNAI1 in tumor tissue correlated with downregulation of CDH1 and VDR genes in both tumor (P=0.047 and P=0.014, respectively) and NAT lacking SNAI1 expression (P=0.054 and P=0.003). ZEB1 expression was directly related to VDR expression in tumor tissue  (r=0.39; P=0.027) and inversely to CDH1 in NAT (r=-0.46; P=0.010). CDH1 and VDR were also downregulated in SW480-ADH and MaCaT cells, respectively, when they were co-cultured with Snai1-expressing cells. Furthermore, cytokine analysis showed differences in the conditioned media obtained from the two cell types. These results indicate that histologically normal tissue adjacent to tumor tissue expressing the EMT-inducing gene SNAI1 shows alterations in the expression of epithelial differentiation genes such as CDH1 and VDR.
7422	Inhibition of VEGF signaling leads to a proinvasive phenotype in mouse models of  glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) and in a subset of GBM patients treated with bevacizumab. Here, we demonstrate that vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)  directly and negatively regulates tumor cell invasion through enhanced recruitment of the protein tyrosine phosphatase 1B (PTP1B) to a MET/VEGFR2 heterocomplex, thereby suppressing HGF-dependent MET phosphorylation and tumor cell migration. Consequently, VEGF blockade restores and increases MET activity in GBM cells in a hypoxia-independent manner, while inducing a program reminiscent of epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition highlighted by a T-cadherin to N-cadherin switch and enhanced mesenchymal features. Inhibition of MET in GBM  mouse models blocks mesenchymal transition and invasion provoked by VEGF ablation, resulting in substantial survival benefit.CI  - Copyright (c) 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
7430	Fibrosis of the lung is characterized by the accumulation of myofibroblasts, a key mediator in the fibrogenic reaction. Cumulative evidence indicates that epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), a process whereby epithelial cells become mesenchyme-like, is an important contributing source for the myofibroblast population. Underlying this phenotypical change is a dramatic alteration in cellular structure. The receptor for advanced glycation end-products (RAGE) has been suggested to maintain lung homeostasis by mediating cell adhesion, while the family of ezrin/radixin/moesin (ERM) proteins, on the other hand, serve as an important cross-linker between the plasma membrane and cytoskeleton. In the present investigation, we tested the hypothesis that RAGE and ERM interact and play a key role in regulating EMT-associated structural changes in alveolar epithelial cells. Exposure of A549 cells to inflammatory cytokines resulted in phosphorylation and redistribution of ERM to the cell periphery and localization  with EMT-related actin stress fibers. Simultaneously, blockade of Rho kinase (ROCK) signaling attenuated these cytokine-induced structural changes. Additionally, RAGE expression was diminished after cytokine stimulation, with release of its soluble isoform via a matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-9-dependent mechanism. Immunofluorescence microscopy and coimmunoprecipitation revealed association between ERM and RAGE under basal conditions, which was disrupted when challenged with inflammatory cytokines, as ERM in its activated state complexed with membrane-linked CD44. Dual-fluorescence immunohistochemistry of patient idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) tissues highlighted marked diminution of RAGE in fibrotic samples, together with enhanced levels of CD44 and double-positive cells for CD44 and phospho (p)ERM. These data suggest that dysregulation of the ERM-RAGE complex might be an important step in rearrangement of the actin cytoskeleton during proinflammatory cytokine-induced EMT of human alveolar epithelial cells.
7431	Scribble (Scrib), Discs large, and Lethal giant larvae form a protein complex that regulates different aspects of cell polarization, including apical-basal asymmetry in epithelial cells and anterior-posterior polarity in migrating cells. Here, we show that Scrib interacts with the intermediate filament cytoskeleton in epithelial Madin-Darby canine kidney (MDCK) cells and endothelial human umbilical vein endothelial cells. Scrib binds vimentin via its postsynaptic density 95/disc-large/zona occludens domains and in MDCK cells redistributes from filaments to the plasma membrane during the establishment of cell-cell contacts.  RNA interference-mediated silencing of Scrib, vimentin, or both in MDCK cells results in defects in the polarization of the Golgi apparatus during cell migration. Concomitantly, wound healing is delayed due to the loss of directional movement. Furthermore, cell aggregation is dependent on both Scrib and vimentin.  The similar phenotypes observed after silencing either Scrib or vimentin support  a coordinated role for the two proteins in cell migration and aggregation. Interestingly, silencing of vimentin leads to an increased proteasomal degradation of Scrib. Thus, the upregulation of vimentin expression during epithelial to mesenchymal transitions may stabilize Scrib to promote directed cell migration.
7447	epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a crucial step for the acquisition of  invasive properties of carcinoma cells during tumor progression. Epidermal growth factor (EGF)-treatment of squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) cells provokes changes in the expression of lineage markers, morphological changes, and a higher invasive and metastatic potential. Here we show that chronic stimulation with EGF induces  EMT in skin-derived SCC cell lines along with the down-regulation of the epithelial marker E-cadherin, and of the putative tumor suppressor VILIP-1 (visinin-like protein 1). In esophageal squamous cell carcinoma and non-small cell lung carcinoma the loss of VILIP-1 correlates with clinicopathological features related to enhanced invasiveness. VILIP-1 has previously been shown to suppress tumor cell invasion via enhancing cAMP-signaling in a murine SCC model.  In mouse skin SCC cell lines the VILIP-1-negative tumor cells have low cAMP levels, whereas VILIP-1-positive SCCs possess high cAMP levels, but low invasive  properties. We show that in VILIP-1-negative SCCs, Snail1, a transcriptional repressor involved in EMT, is up-regulated. Snail1 expression is reduced by ectopic VILIP-1-expression in VILIP-1-negative SCC cells, and application of the  general adenylyl cyclase inhibitor 2',3'-dideoxyadenosine attenuated this effect. Conversely, EGF-stimulation of VILIP-1-positive SCC cells leads to the down-regulation of VILIP-1 and the induction of Snail1 expression. The induction  of Snail is inhibited by elevated cAMP levels. The role of cAMP in EMT was further highlighted by its suppressive effect on the EGF-induced enhancement of migration in VILIP-1-positive SCC cells. These findings indicate that VILIP-1 is  involved in EMT of SCC by regulating the transcription factor Snail1 in a cAMP-dependent manner.
7448	PURPOSE: Extracellular matrix (ECM) accumulates during the development of posterior capsule opacification (PCO). Vitronectin, an ECM component that is generally prominent in wound healing, has been detected in PCO specimens. Here we set out to investigate the distribution of vitronectin in the lens and determine  how it, and other ECM components, influence the lens epithelial phenotype. METHODS: Rat lens epithelial explants were cultured on vitronectin, fibronectin,  and laminin substrata. Explants were monitored for cell migration and the appearance of markers for epithelial mesenchymal transition (EMT), using phase contrast microscopy and immunohistochemistry, respectively. Explants were also monitored for evidence of Smad signaling. Vitronectin expression was analyzed in  embryonic and postnatal rodent lens development by immunohistochemistry, western  blotting, and in situ hybridization. RESULTS: Vitronectin, like fibronectin and laminin, provided a good substratum for cellular attachment and migration. However, in the case of vitronectin and fibronectin, this was accompanied by a major phenotypic change. On either vitronectin or fibronectin, but not laminin, most of the cells became elongated, spindle-shaped and were strongly reactive for filamentous alpha-smooth muscle actin. In these respects this transition was typical of the well known TGFbeta-induced EMT. In explants cultured on vitronectin and fibronectin, but not laminin, cell nuclei showed prominent reactivity for Smad 2/3. Vitronectin was also shown to be expressed during embryonic and postnatal development. Initially mRNA and protein were detected in  all lens cells, however as development progressed, expression became restricted to cells of the epithelium and transition zone. CONCLUSIONS: The results clearly  show that lens cell engagement with a vitronectin or a fibronectin, but not laminin, substratum has a potent EMT promoting effect and that Smad 2/3 signaling is involved. Thus when considering strategies to slow or prevent PCO, these results highlight the need to take into account ECM molecules such as vitronectin that have the capacity to promote EMT.
7471	The Wnt beta-catenin pathway controls numerous cellular processes including cell  differentiation and cell-fate decisions. Wnt ligands engage Frizzled receptors and the low-density-lipoprotein-related protein 5/6 (LRP5/6) receptor complex leading to the recruitment of Dishevelled (Dvl) and Axin1 to the plasma membrane. Axin1 has a regulator of G-protein signaling (RGS) domain that binds adenomatous  polyposis coli and Galpha subunits, thereby providing a mechanism by which Galpha subunits can affect beta-catenin levels. Here we show that Wnt signaling enhances the expression of another RGS domain-containing protein, PDZ-RGS3. Reducing PDZ-RGS3 levels impaired Wnt3a-induced activation of the canonical pathway. PDZ-RGS3 bound GSK3beta and decreased its catalytic activity toward beta-catenin. PDZ-RGS3 overexpression enhanced Snail1 and led to morphological and biochemical  changes reminiscent of epithelial mesenchymal transition (EMT). These results indicate that PDZ-RGS3 can enhance signals generated by the Wnt canonical pathway and that plays a pivotal role in EMT.
7474	expression of Snail has been shown to mediate epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) of epithelial cells and carcinomas, characterized by morphological alterations with disappearance and appearance of E-cadherin and vimentin, respectively. Here, we show that ectopic expression of Snail in human epidermoid  carcinoma A431 cells (Snail/A431) induces the representative EMT, resulting in remarkable motile and invasive properties of the cells. expression of Wnt5a, its  receptor Ror2 and matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-2 is induced in Snail/A431, but  not in control A431 cells. Interestingly, suppressed expression of either Wnt5a or Ror2 in Snail/A431 cells results in the inhibition of in vitro cell motility and invasiveness, at least partly mediated by MMP-2, without affecting characteristics of EMT, i.e., mesenchymal morphology, and down- and up-regulations of E-cadherin and vimentin, respectively. We further show that endogenous Snail is required for sustained expression of Wnt5a, Ror2 and MMP-13 in human osteosarcoma SaOS-2 cells. The results indicate that expression of both  Wnt5a and Ror2 is induced during Snail-mediated EMT or malignant progression of cancer cells and that consequently activated Wnt5a-Ror2 signaling confers highly  motile and invasive properties on cancer cells. Thus, Wnt5a-Ror2 signaling can be a target of cancer therapies to prevent cancer cells from undergoing invasion and metastasis.CI  - (c) 2011 The Authors. Journal compilation (c) 2011 by the Molecular Biology Society of Japan/Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
7475	epithelial-to-mesenchymal transitions (EMTs) play key roles in the normal development of an organism as well as its demise following the metastasis of a malignant tumour. An EMT during early mouse development results in the differentiation of primitive endoderm into the parietal endoderm that forms part  of the parietal yolk sac. In the embryo, primitive endoderm develops from cells in the inner cell mass, but the signals that instruct these cells to become specified and adopt an epithelial fate are poorly understood. The mouse F9 teratocarcinoma cell line, a model that can recapitulate the in vivo primitive to parietal endoderm EMT, has been used extensively to elucidate the signalling cascades involved in extraembryonic endoderm differentiation. Here, we identified Wnt6 as a gene up-regulated in F9 cells in response to RA and show that Wnt6 expressing cells or cells exposed to Wnt6 conditioned media form primitive endoderm. Wnt6 induction of primitive endoderm is accompanied by beta-catenin and Snail1 translocation to the nucleus and the appearance of cytokeratin intermediate filaments. Attenuating glycogen synthase kinase 3 activity using LiCl gave similar results, but the fact that cells de-differentiate when LiCl is  removed reveals that other signalling pathways are required to maintain cells as  primitive endoderm. Finally, Wnt6-induced primitive endodermal cells were tested  to determine their competency to complete the EMT and differentiate into parietal endoderm. Towards that end, results show that up-regulating protein kinase A activity is sufficient to induce markers of parietal endoderm. Together, these findings indicate that undifferentiated F9 cells are responsive to canonical Wnt  signalling, which negatively regulates glycogen synthase kinase 3 activity leading to the epithelialization and specification of primitive endoderm competent to receive additional signals required for EMT. Considering the ability of F9 cells to mimic an in vivo EMT, the identification of this Wnt6-beta-catenin-Snail signalling cascade has broad implications for understanding EMT mechanisms in embryogenesis and metastasis.
7490	Mature tubular epithelial cells in the adult kidney can undergo epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), a phenotypic change that is linked to the pathogenesis of renal interstitial fibrosis. EMT may be considered the reverse of mesenchymal-epithelial transition, which occurs during normal kidney development. The Wilms' tumor suppressor gene WT1 and the paired box 2 gene Pax2  are needed to induce mesenchymal-epithelial transition and play key roles in the  progression of nephrogenesis. However, until now, WT1 and Pax2 have not been tested for their direct involvement in the process of renal tubular EMT. In this  study, we explored the potential roles of WT1 and Pax2 in EMT that is induced in  the remnant kidney of rats following 5/6 nephrectomy. We also examined WT1 and Pax2 in cultured renal tubular epithelial (NRK52E) cells treated with interleukin-1alpha and investigated the effects of blocking EMT using RNA interference. We showed that WT1 and Pax2 were re-expressed in the EMT models, and these were accompanied by decreased expression of E-cadherin and increased expression of vimentin, Snail and alpha-smooth muscle actin. Silencing WT1 and Pax2 by RNA interference blocked the interleukin-1alpha-induced EMT in the NRK52E cells, as reflected in the suppression of alpha-SMA and Snail expression, the restoration of E-cadherin expression and normal cell morphology. Our experiments  suggested that the re-expression of WT1 and Pax2 in the tubular epithelial cells  plays important roles in the promotion of EMT, and there may be therapeutic value in silencing Pax2 and WT1 to prevent or reverse renal fibrosis.CI  - Copyright (c) 2011 S. Karger AG, Basel.
7528	The ubiquitously expressed Polycomb Group protein Yin-Yang1 (YY1) is believed to  regulate gene expression through direct binding to DNA elements found in promoters or enhancers of target loci. Additionally, YY1 contains diverse domains that enable a plethora of protein-protein interactions, including association with the Oct4/Sox2 pluripotency complex and Polycomb Group silencing complexes. To elucidate the in vivo role of YY1 during gastrulation, we generated embryos with an epiblast specific deletion of Yy1. Yy1 conditional knockout (cKO) embryos initiate gastrulation, but both primitive streak formation and ingression through the streak is severely impaired. These streak descendants fail to repress E-Cadherin and are unable to undergo an appropriate epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT). Intriguingly, overexpression of Nodal and concomitant reduction of Lefty2 are observed in Yy1 cKO embryos, suggesting that YY1 is normally required for proper Nodal regulation during gastrulation. Furthermore, definitive endoderm is specified but fails to properly integrate into the outer layer. Although anterior neuroectoderm is specified, mesoderm production is severely restricted. We show that YY1 directly binds to the Lefty2 locus in E7.5 embryos and that pharmacological inhibition of Nodal signaling partially restores mesoderm production in Yy1 cKO mutant embryos. Our results reveal critical requirements for YY1 during several important developmental processes, including  EMT and regulation of Nodal signaling. These results are the first to elucidate the diverse role of YY1 during gastrulation in vivo.CI  - Copyright (c) 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
7534	ErbB2, a metastasis-promoting oncoprotein, is overexpressed in approximately 25%  of invasive/metastatic breast cancers, but in 50%-60% of noninvasive ductal carcinomas in situ (DCIS). It has been puzzling how a subset of ErbB2-overexpressing DCIS develops into invasive breast cancer (IBC). We found that co-overexpression of 14-3-3zeta in ErbB2-overexpressing DCIS conferred a higher risk of progression to IBC. ErbB2 and 14-3-3zeta overexpression, respectively, increased cell migration and decreased cell adhesion, two prerequisites of tumor cell invasion. 14-3-3zeta overexpression reduced cell adhesion by activating the TGF-beta/Smads pathway that led to ZFHX1B/SIP-1 upregulation, E-cadherin loss, and epithelial-mesenchymal transition. Importantly, patients whose breast tumors overexpressed both ErbB2 and 14-3-3zeta had higher rates of metastatic recurrence and death than those whose tumors overexpressed only one.
7764	The Kruppel-like zinc finger protein ZNF217 is a candidate oncogene in breast cancer. In this study, we showed that high levels of expression of ZNF217 mRNA are associated with poor prognosis and the development of metastases in breast cancer. Overexpression of ZNF217 in breast cancer cells stimulated migration and  invasion in vitro and promoted the development of spontaneous lung or node metastases in mice in vivo. ZNF217 also promoted epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in human mammary epithelial cells, and the TGF-beta-activated Smad signaling pathway was identified as a major driver of ZNF217-induced EMT. In addition, a TGF-beta autocrine loop sustained activation of the TGF-beta pathway  in ZNF217-overexpressing mammary epithelial cells, most likely because of ZNF217-mediated direct upregulation of TGFB2 or TGFB3. Inhibition of the TGF-beta pathway led to the reversal of ZNF217-mediated EMT. Together, our findings indicate that ZNF217 mRNA expression may represent a novel prognostic biomarker in breast cancer. Therapeutic targeting of ZNF217 of the TGF-beta signaling pathway may benefit the subset of patients whose tumors express high levels of ZNF217.
7791	development is punctuated by morphogenetic rearrangements of epithelial tissues,  including detachment of motile cells during epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). Dramatic actin rearrangements occur as cell-cell junctions are dismantled  and cells become independently motile during EMT. Characterizing dynamic actin rearrangements and identifying actin machinery driving these rearrangements is essential for understanding basic mechanisms of cell-cell junction remodeling. Using immunofluorescence and live cell imaging of scattering MDCK cells we examine dynamic actin rearrangement events during EMT and demonstrate that zyxin-VASP complexes mediate linkage of dynamic medial actin networks to adherens junction (AJ) membranes. A functional analysis of zyxin in EMT reveals its role in regulating disruption of actin membrane linkages at cell-cell junctions, altering cells' ability to fully detach and migrate independently during EMT. expression of a constitutively active zyxin mutant results in persistent actin-membrane linkages and cell migration without loss of cell-cell adhesion. We propose zyxin functions in morphogenetic rearrangements, maintaining collective migration by transducing individual cells' movements through AJs, thus preventing the dissociation of individual migratory cells.
7852	AIMS: Determination of prognostic parameters that are predictive of survival of gastric cancer (GC) may allow better identification of patients who could benefit from current chemotherapy regimens. To assess the correlation between tumour progression and epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), we assayed the expression levels of selected molecules involved in EMT [CD44, transforming growth factor (TGF)-alpha, cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2), matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-7, MMP-9 and C-X-C chemokine receptor (CXCR4)], and correlated these with overall patient survival (OS) and disease stage. METHODS AND RESULTS: Medical records and pathological biopsy results of 137 patients with GC were evaluated retrospectively. Spearman's correlation analysis showed that expression of CXCR4  was correlated significantly with the expression of all other proteins studied. In contrast, COX-2 expression correlated significantly with the expression of only MMP-7 (P = 0.011), MMP-9 (P = 0.015) and CXCR4 (P = 0.013). We observed significant negative correlations between OS and the expression of TGF-alpha (P = 0.017), COX-2 (P < 0.001), CXCR4 (P = 0.010), MMP-7 (P = 0.020) and MMP-9 (P = 0.015). On multivariate analysis, only COX-2 was an independent prognostic factor for OS [hazard ratio (HR) = 3.34; 95% confidence interval (CI): 1.43-9.75; P = 0.002). CONCLUSIONS: COX-2, TGF-alpha, MMP-7, MMP-9 and CXCR4 are associated with poor OS in gastric cancer.CI  - (c) 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
80004	Alternative splicing achieves coordinated changes in post-transcriptional gene expression programmes through the activities of diverse RNA-binding proteins. epithelial splicing regulatory proteins 1 and 2 (ESRP1 and ESRP2) are cell-type-specific regulators of transcripts that switch splicing during the epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). To define a comprehensive programme of alternative splicing that is regulated during the EMT, we identified an extensive ESRP-regulated splicing network of hundreds of alternative splicing events within numerous genes with functions in cell-cell adhesion, polarity, and migration. Loss of this global ESRP-regulated epithelial splicing programme induces the phenotypic changes in cell morphology that are observed during the EMT. Components of this splicing signature provide novel molecular markers that can be used to characterize the EMT. Bioinformatics and experimental approaches revealed a high-affinity ESRP-binding motif and a predictive RNA map that governs their activity. This work establishes the ESRPs as coordinators of a complex alternative splicing network that adds an important post-transcriptional layer to the changes in gene expression that underlie epithelial-mesenchymal transitions during development and disease.
80237	Ell3 is a testis-specific RNA polymerase II elongation factor whose cellular function is not clear. The present study shows that Ell3 is activated during the  differentiation of mouse embryonic stem cells (mESCs). Furthermore, Ell3 plays a  critical role in stimulating lineage differentiation of mESCs by promoting epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and suppressing apoptosis. Mouse ESCs engineered to stably express Ell3 were rapidly differentiated compared with control cells either under spontaneous differentiation or neural lineage-specific differentiation conditions. Gene expression profile and quantitative RT-PCR analysis showed that the expression of EMT markers, such as Zeb1 and Zeb2, two major genes that regulate EMT, was upregulated in Ell3-overexpressing mESCs. Remarkably, knockdown of Zeb1 attenuated the enhanced differentiation capacity of Ell3-overexpressing mESCs, which indicates that Ell3 plays a role in the induction of mESC differentiation by inducing EMT. In contrast to Ell3-overexpressing mESCs, Ell3-knock down mESCs could not differentiate under differentiation conditions and, instead, underwent caspase-dependent apoptosis. In addition, apoptosis of differentiating Ell3-knock out mESCs was associated with enhanced expression of p53. The present results suggest that Ell3 promotes the differentiation of mESCs by activating the expression of EMT-related genes and by suppressing p53 expression.
8061	The process of epithelial mesenchymal transition, whereby cells acquire molecular alterations and fibroblastic features, is a fundamental process of embryogenesis  and cancer invasion/metastasis. The mechanisms responsible for epithelial mesenchymal transition remain elusive. Human tumors frequently establish constitutively activated RAS signaling, which contributes to the malignant phenotype. In an effort to dissect distinct RAS isoform specific functions, we previously established human colon cell lines stably overexpressing activated Harvey-RAS (Ha-RAS) and Kirsten-RAS (Ki-RAS). Using these, we observed that only  oncogenic Ha-RAS overexpression resulted in morphologic and molecular changes suggestive of epithelial to mesenchymal transition. We showed that vimentin, a key molecule of epithelial mesenchymal transition, was differentially regulated between Ha-RAS and Ki-RAS leading to a Ha-RAS specific induction of a migratory phenotype and eventually epithelial to mesenchymal transition. We demonstrated that the AP-1 sites in vimentin promoter could be involved in this regulation. A  potential role of FRA-1 was suggested in the regulation of vimentin during the Ha-RAS-induced epithelial to mesenchymal transition, in association with colon cell migration. Our results therefore propose that in colon cells, the induction  of epithelial mesenchymal transition by oncogenic Ha-RAS could occur through the  overexpression of proteins like FRA-1 and vimentin.
8091	High mobility group protein A2 (HMGA2) is an architectural transcription factor that plays an important role in development and progression of malignant neoplasias. Recently, some studies reported that HMGA2 is also implicated in epithelial-mesenchymal transitions (EMT) and cancer stem cells. But the underlying mechanisms of these conditions are poorly understood. Therefore, we established an EMT model of gastric carcinoma cells by overexpressing HMGA2 in vitro, then global mapping of HMGA2 potential transcription factor binding sites  was identified by promoter microarray in these cells, and the date obtained from  the microarrays were validated via chromatin immunoprecipitation-PCR (ChIP-PCR) and real-time PCR. HMGA2 potential target genes were classified in KEGG database  and Gene Ontology (GO) analyses. To our knowledge, this is the first report on the genome-wide analysis of HMGA2 downstream direct targets, and these findings will be valuable in understanding the roles of HMGA2 in EMT.
8312	The nuclear p68 RNA helicase (referred to as p68) is a prototypical member of the DEAD box family of RNA helicases. The protein plays a very important role in early organ development. In the present study, we characterized the tyrosine phosphorylation of p68 under platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) stimulation. We demonstrated that tyrosine phosphorylation of p68 at Y593 mediated PDGF-stimulated epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). We showed that PDGF treatment led to phosphorylation of p68 at Y593 in the cell nucleus. The Y593-phosphorylated p68 (referred to as phosphor-p68) promotes beta-catenin nuclear translocation via a Wnt-independent pathway. The phosphor-p68 facilitates beta-catenin nuclear translocation by blocking phosphorylation of beta-catenin by GSK-3beta and displacing Axin from beta-catenin. The beta-catenin nuclear translocation and subsequent interaction with the LEF/TCF was required for the EMT process. These data demonstrated a novel mechanism of phosphor-p68 in mediating the growth factor-induced EMT and uncovered a new pathway to promote beta-catenin nuclear translocation.
8313	Aberrant activation of canonical Wingless-type MMTV integration site family (Wnt) signaling is pathognomonic of colorectal cancers (CRC) harboring functional mutations in either adenomatous polyposis coli or beta-catenin. Coincident with Wnt cascade activation, CRCs also up-regulate the expression of Wnt pathway feedback inhibitors, particularly the putative tumor suppressor, Axin2. Because Axin2 serves as a negative regulator of canonical Wnt signaling in normal cells,  recent attention has focused on the utility of increasing Axin2 levels in CRCs as a means to slow tumor progression. However, rather than functioning as a tumor suppressor, we demonstrate that Axin2 acts as a potent promoter of carcinoma behavior by up-regulating the activity of the transcriptional repressor, Snail1,  inducing a functional epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) program and driving metastatic activity. Silencing Axin2 expression decreases Snail1 activity, reverses EMT, and inhibits CRC invasive and metastatic activities in concert with global effects on the Wnt-regulated cancer cell transcriptome. The further identification of Axin2 and nuclear Snail1 proteins at the invasive front of human CRCs supports a revised model wherein Axin2 acts as a potent tumor promoter in vivo.
84695	The transcription factor Snail controls epithelial-mesenchymal transitions (EMT)  by repressing E-cadherin expression and other epithelial genes. However, the mechanisms involved in the regulation of Snail function are not fully understood. Here we show that lysyl-oxidase-like 2 and 3 (LOXL2 and LOXL3), two members of the lysyl-oxidase gene family, interact and cooperate with Snail to downregulate  E-cadherin expression. Snail's lysine residues 98 and 137 are essential for Snail stability, functional cooperation with LOXL2/3 and induction of EMT. Overexpression of LOXL2 or LOXL3 in epithelial cells induces an EMT process, supporting their implication in tumor progression. The biological importance of LOXL2 is further supported by RNA interference of LOXL2 in Snail-expressing metastatic carcinoma cells, which led to a strong decrease of tumor growth associated to increased apoptosis and reduced expression of mesenchymal and invasive/angiogenic markers. Taken together, these results establish a direct link between LOXL2 and Snail in carcinoma progression.
8482	epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a key process in cancer progression and metastasis, requiring cooperation of the epidermal growth factor/Ras with the transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta) signaling pathway in a multistep process. The molecular mechanisms by which Ras signaling contributes to EMT, however, remain elusive to a large extent. We therefore examined the transcriptional repressor Ets2-repressor factor (ERF)-a bona fide Ras-extracellular signal-regulated kinase/mitogen-activated protein kinase effector-for its ability to interfere with TGF-beta-induced EMT in mammary epithelial cells (EpH4) expressing oncogenic Ras (EpRas). ERF-overexpressing EpRas cells failed to undergo TGF-beta-induced EMT, formed three-dimensional tubular structures in collagen gels, and retained expression of epithelial markers. Transcriptome analysis indicated that TGF-beta signaling through Smads was mostly unaffected, and ERF suppressed the TGF-beta-induced EMT via Semaphorin-7a repression. Forced expression of Semaphorin-7a in ERF-overexpressing EpRas cells reestablished their ability to undergo EMT. In contrast, inhibition of Semaphorin-7a in the parental EpRas cells inhibited their ability to undergo TGF-beta-induced EMT. Our data suggest that oncogenic Ras may  play an additional role in EMT via the ERF, regulating Semaphorin-7a and providing a new interconnection between the Ras- and the TGF-beta-signaling pathways.
8487	epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), a crucial event in cancer progression and embryonic development, is induced by transforming growth factor (TGF)-beta in mouse mammary NMuMG epithelial cells. Id proteins have previously been reported to inhibit major features of TGF-beta-induced EMT. In this study, we show that expression of the deltaEF1 family proteins, deltaEF1 (ZEB1) and SIP1, is gradually increased by TGF-beta with expression profiles reciprocal to that of E-cadherin. SIP1 and deltaEF1 each dramatically down-regulated the transcription  of E-cadherin in NMuMG cells through direct binding to the E-cadherin promoter. Silencing of the expression of both SIP1 and deltaEF1, but not either alone, completely abolished TGF-beta-induced E-cadherin repression. However, expression  of mesenchymal markers, including fibronectin, N-cadherin, and vimentin, was not  affected by knockdown of SIP1 and deltaEF1. TGF-beta-induced the expression of Ets1, which in turn activated deltaEF1 promoter activity. Moreover, up-regulation of SIP1 and deltaEF1 expression by TGF-beta was suppressed by knockdown of Ets1 expression. In addition, Id2 suppressed the TGF-beta- and Ets1-induced up-regulation of deltaEF1. Taken together, these findings suggest that the deltaEF1 family proteins, SIP1 and deltaEF1, are necessary, but not sufficient, for TGF-beta-induced EMT and that Ets1 induced by TGF-beta may function as an upstream transcriptional regulator of SIP1 and deltaEF1.
857	Pancreatic cancer is one of the deadliest cancers due to early rapid metastasis and chemoresistance. Recently, epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) was shown to play a key role in the pathogenesis of pancreatic cancer. To understand  the role of caveolin-1 (Cav-1) in EMT, we over-expressed Cav-1 in a pancreatic cancer cell line, Panc 10.05, that does not normally express Cav-1. Here, we show that Cav-1 expression in pancreatic cancer cells induces an epithelial phenotype  and promotes cell-cell contact, with increased expression of plasma membrane bound E-cadherin and beta-catenin. Mechanistically, Cav-1 induces Snail downregulation and decreased activation of AKT, MAPK and TGF-beta-Smad signaling  pathways. In vitro, Cav-1 expression reduces cell migration and invasion, and attenuates doxorubicin-chemoresistance of pancreatic cancer cells. Importantly, in vivo studies revealed that Cav-1 expression greatly suppresses tumor formation in a xenograft model. Most interestingly, Panc/Cav-1 tumors displayed organized nests of differentiated cells that were totally absent in control tumors. Confirming our in vitro results, these nests of differentiated cells showed reexpression of E-cadherin and beta-catenin at the cell membrane. Thus, we provide evidence that Cav-1 functions as a crucial modulator of EMT and cell differentiation in pancreatic cancer.
8626	Although members of the p63 family of transcription factors are known for their role in the development and differentiation of epithelial surfaces, their function in cancer is less clear. Here, we show that depletion of the DeltaNp63alpha and beta isoforms, leaving only DeltaNp63gamma, results in epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) in the normal breast cell line MCF10A. EMT can be rescued by the expression of the DeltaNp63alpha isoform. We also show  that DeltaNp63gamma expressed in a background where all the other DeltaNp63 are knocked down causes EMT with an increase in TGFbeta-1, -2, and -3 and downstream  effectors Smads2/3/4. In addition, a p63 binding site in intron 1 of TGFbeta was  identified. Inhibition of the TGFbeta response with a specific inhibitor results  in reversion of EMT in DeltaNp63alpha- and beta-depleted cells. In summary, we show that p63 is involved in inhibiting EMT and reduction of certain p63 isoforms may be important in the development of epithelial cancers.
864	The transcription factor RUNX3 functions as a tumor suppressor in the gastrointestinal epithelium, where its loss is an early event in carcinogenesis.  While RUNX3 acts concurrently as a mediator of TGF-beta signaling and an antagonist of Wnt, the cellular changes that follow its loss and their contribution to tumorigenicity are not fully understood. Here, we report that the loss of Runx3 in gastric epithelial cells results in spontaneous epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). This produces a tumorigenic stem cell-like subpopulation, which remarkably expresses the gastric stem cell marker  Lgr5. This phenomenon is due to the compounding effects of the dysregulation of the TGF-beta and Wnt pathways. Specifically, Runx3(-/-) p53(-/-) gastric epithelial cells were unexpectedly sensitized for TGF-beta-induced EMT, during which the resultant induction of Lgr5 was enhanced by an aberrantly activated Wnt pathway. These data demonstrate a protective role for RUNX3 in safeguarding gastric epithelial cells against aberrant growth factor signaling and the resultant cellular plasticity and stemness.CI  - Copyright (c) 2012 AlphaMed Press.
8650	Numb is an endocytic adaptor protein that regulates internalization and post-endocytic trafficking of cell surface proteins. In polarized epithelial cells Numb is localized to the basolateral membrane, and recent work has implicated Numb in regulation of cell adhesion and migration, suggesting a role for Numb in epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). We depleted MDCK cells of Numb and examined the effects downstream of EMT-promoting stimuli. While knockdown of Numb did not affect apicobasal polarity, we show that depletion of Numb destabilizes E-cadherin-based cell-cell adhesion and promotes loss of epithelial cell morphology. In addition, Numb knockdown in MDCK cells potentiates HGF-induced lamellipodia formation and cell dispersal. Examination of Rac1-GTP levels in Numb knockdown cells revealed hyperactivation of Rac1 following extracellular calcium depletion and HGF stimulation, which corresponds with enhanced loss of cell adhesions and lamellipodia formation. Furthermore, inhibition of Rac1 in Numb depleted cells stabilized cell-cell contacts following depletion of extracellular calcium. Together, these data indicate that Numb acts  to suppress Rac1-GTP accumulation, and its loss leads to increased sensitivity toward extracellular signals that disrupt cell-cell adhesion to induce epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and cell dispersal.CI  - Copyright A(c) 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
8668	epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a process by which epithelial cells undergo conversion to a mesenchymal phenotype contributing to wound repair by fibrosis and to cancer cell acquisition of invasive ability. Recently, we showed  that type II TGF-beta receptor interacting protein-1 (TRIP-1), a protein identified as a phosphorylation target of the TGF-beta type II receptor kinase and as a functional component of eukaryotic translation initiator factor 3 (eiF3) multiprotein complex, is a novel modulator of fibroblast collagen contraction, an important step in wound repair stimulated by TGF-beta1 action. TGF-beta1 drives EMT, but it is not known whether TRIP-1 expression influences EMT induction. To investigate whether TRIP-1 plays a role in EMT induction we studied the effect of downregulating TRIP-1 expression in the well-characterized A549 model of TGF-beta1 induction of EMT. Here we report that short hairpin RNA (shRNA)-mediated depletion of TRIP-1 gene transcripts in A549 cells promotes EMT  as assessed by changes in phenotypic markers, morphology, and migrative ability.  Knockdown of TRIP-1 dramatically increased A549 responsiveness to TGF-beta1 induction of EMT. Mechanistically, a pathway involving increased TGF-beta type II receptor level, enhanced Smad3 phosphorylation, and the transcription factor SLUG is implicated. Altogether, the findings point to regulation of endogenous TRIP-1  protein expression as a potential strategy to target EMT, and related invasive behavior, in cancer cells.
873	Human carbonyl reductase 1 (CBR1) is an enzyme that catalyse the reduction of many compounds by using NADPH-dependent oxydoreductase activity. Although CBR1 is known to regulate the tumour progression, the molecular mechanisms of CBR1 in cancer progression and the clinical significance of CBR1 status remain unclear. Here, we investigated the molecular mechanisms by which CBR1 affects cancer cell  behaviour in vitro and the clinical significance of CBR1 using immunohistochemical analyses in endometrial cancer. Here, the role of CBR1 in cancer cell invasion and metastasis, and its molecular mechanisms were investigated by transfection of sense and antisense CBR1 cDNAs into a human endometrial adenocarcinoma cell line. The relationship between CBR1 expression analysed by immunohistochemistry and prognosis such as progression free survival  (PFS) and overall survival (OS) was examined in endometrial cancer tissues from FIGO stage I-IV (n=109). Suppression of CBR1 by antisense CBR1 cDNA increased cancer cell invasion, and suppressed E-cadherin expression and capacity for cellular aggregation. In contrast, over-expression of CBR1 by sense CBR1 cDNA increased E-cadherin expression and capacity for cellular aggregation, and suppressed cancer cell invasion. The expression of transcriptional suppressors of E-cadherin, Snail and ZEB1, were increased by CBR1 suppression, but suppressed by CBR1 over-expression. Immunohistochemical analyses showed that decreased CBR1 expression is significantly related with poor PFS and OS compared with strong CBR1 expression. In multivariate analyses, decreased CBR1 expression was an independent prognostic factor for PFS and OS. CBR1 regulates cancer cell invasion in endometrial adenocarcinomas by regulating the epithelial mesenchymal transition. A decreased CBR1 expression can be a useful marker of an unfavourable clinical outcome in patients with endometrial cancer.CI  - Copyright (c) 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.
8828	Neuropilins, initially characterized as neuronal receptors, act as co-receptors for cancer related growth factors and were recently involved in several signaling pathways leading to cytoskeletal organization, angiogenesis and cancer progression. Then, we sought to investigate the ability of neuropilin-2 to orchestrate epithelial-mesenchymal transition in colorectal cancer cells. Using specific siRNA to target neuropilin-2 expression, or gene transfer, we first observed that neuropilin-2 expression endows HT29 and Colo320 for xenograft formation. Moreover, neuropilin-2 conferred a fibroblastic-like shape to cancer cells, suggesting an involvement of neuropilin-2 in epithelial-mesenchymal transition. Indeed, the presence of neuropilin-2 in colorectal carcinoma cell lines was correlated with loss of epithelial markers such as cytokeratin-20 and E-cadherin and with acquisition of mesenchymal molecules such as vimentin. Furthermore, we showed by surface plasmon resonance experiments that neuropilin-2 is a receptor for transforming-growth factor-beta1. The expression of neuropilin-2 on colon cancer cell lines was indeed shown to promote transforming-growth factor-beta1 signaling, leading to a constitutive phosphorylation of the Smad2/3 complex. Treatment with specific TGFbeta-type1 receptor kinase inhibitors restored E-cadherin levels and inhibited in part neuropilin-2-induced vimentin expression, suggesting that neuropilin-2 cooperates with TGFbeta-type1 receptor to promote epithelial-mesenchymal transition in colorectal cancer cells. Our results suggest a direct role of NRP2 in epithelial-mesenchymal transition and highlight a cross-talk between neuropilin-2 and TGF-beta1 signaling to promote cancer progression. These results suggest that neuropilin-2 fulfills all the criteria of a therapeutic target to disrupt multiple oncogenic functions in solid tumors.
8838	INTRODUCTION: CCN6/WISP3 belongs to the CCN (Cyr61, CTGF, Nov) family of genes that contains a conserved insulin-like growth factor (IGF) binding protein motif. CCN6 is a secreted protein lost in 80% of the aggressive inflammatory breast cancers, and can decrease mammary tumor growth in vitro and in vivo. We hypothesized that inhibition of CCN6 might result in the loss of a growth regulatory function that protects mammary epithelial cells from the tumorigenic effects of growth factors, particularly IGF-1. METHOD: We treated human mammary epithelial (HME) cells with a CCN6 hairpin short interfering RNA. RESULTS: CCN6-deficient cells showed increased motility and invasiveness, and developed features of epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). Inhibition of CCN6 expression promoted anchorage-independent growth of HME cells and rendered them more responsive to the growth effects of IGF-1, which was coupled with the increased phosphorylation of IGF-1 receptor and insulin receptor substrate-1 (IRS-1). CONCLUSION: Specific stable inhibition of CCN6 expression in HME cells induces EMT, promotes anchorage-independent growth, motility and invasiveness, and sensitizes mammary epithelial cells to the growth effects of IGF-1.
8839	CCN5 is a member of the CCN (connective tissue growth factor/cysteine-rich 61/nephroblastoma overexpressed) family and was identified as an estrogen-inducible gene in estrogen receptor-positive cell lines. However, the role of CCN5 in breast carcinogenesis remains unclear. We report here that the CCN5 protein is localized mostly in the cytoplasm and in part in the nucleus of human tumor breast tissue. Using a heterologous transcription assay, we demonstrate that CCN5 can act as a transcriptional repressor presumably through association with histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1). Microarray gene expression analysis showed that CCN5 represses expression of genes associated with epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) as well as expression of key components of the transforming growth factor beta (TGF-beta) signaling pathway, prominent among them TGF-betaRII receptor. We show that CCN5 is recruited to the TGF-betaRII promoter, thereby providing a mechanism by which CCN5 restricts transcription of the TGF-betaRII gene. Consistent with this finding, CCN5, we found, functions to suppress TGF-beta-induced transcriptional responses and invasion that is concomitant with EMT. Thus, our data uncovered CCN5 as a novel transcriptional repressor that plays an important role in regulating tumor progression functioning, at least in part, by inhibiting the expression of genes  involved in the TGF-beta signaling cascade that is known to promote EMT.
8842	The epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) has been linked to induction of a stem-cell like phenotype, characterized by altered cell surface marker expression and increased tumor formation. The aim of this study was to investigate whether EMT correlates with CD24+CD44+ and CD133+ cells in pancreatic cancer. The morphology of untreated and gemcitabine-treated SW1990 gemcitabine-resistant cells and normal SW1990 cells were compared. NF-kappaB p65 expression was knocked down using siRNA. Vimentin and E-cadherin expression were analyzed using western  blotting, and CD24+CD44+, CD133+ cells were quantified by FACS. Additionally, immunohistochemistry of EMT-associated markers and stem cell-associated markers were performed in 41 cases of human pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma. In SW1990 gemcitabine-resistant cells, gemcitabine induced a mesenchymal cell phenotype, expression of EMT-related molecular markers and increased CD24+CD44+ and CD133+ cells compared to untreated SW1990 gemcitabine-resistant and SW1990 cells. Knockdown of NF-kappaB p65 inhibited the ability of gemcitabine to increase the proportion of CD24+CD44+ or CD133+ cells and expression of EMT-related molecular  markers. In human pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma, significant correlations were observed between expression of the EMT-associated markers vimentin and E-cadherin, and stem cell-associated markers CD24, CD133 and CD44. This study demonstrated that EMT correlated with CD24+CD44+ and CD133+ cells in pancreatic cancer. This study also suggests that EMT may induce cancer stem-like cells in pancreatic cancer, with different degrees of EMT probability inducing different proportions of CD24+CD44+ and CD133+ cells.
89780	PURPOSE: Posterior capsular opacification (PCO) is caused mainly by the epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), proliferation, and migration of human lens epithelial (HLE) cells. wingless (Wnt) signaling has been implicated in the  fibrotic process by inducing EMT and increasing the proliferation of epithelial cells. This study investigated the role of Wnt3a in PCO formation. METHODS: Wnt3a was overexpressed in the HLE B-3 cell line by transfected Wnt3a-pcDNA3 plasmid. The expressions of Wnt/beta-catenin signaling component proteins, including beta-catenin, E-cadherin, fibronectin, c-Myc, and cyclin D1, were detected by western blot analysis and immunocytofluorescence to confirm the efficiency of transfection efficiency and analyze the effects of overexpression. HLE migration  ability was evaluated by transwell migration and wound healing assays, whereas HLE proliferation was analyzed by MTT [3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl) -2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide] assay and flow cytometry. RESULTS: Overexpression of Wnt3a resulted in upregulated expression of beta-catenin, c-Myc, and cyclin D1. expression of the lens epithelial marker E-cadherin was down-regulated in Wnt3a-overexpressing HLE B-3 cells, whereas that of the mesenchymal marker fibronectin was upregulated. In addition, the morphology of HLE B-3 cells changed from the classic spindle shape to an irregular form. Overexpression of Wnt3a could enhance the ability of migration as determined by transwell migration and wound healing assays as well as promoted the proliferation of HLE B-3 cells by MTT assay and flow cytometry analysis. CONCLUSIONS: Wnt3a can induce EMT, migration, and proliferation of HLE cells and  may be a valuable therapeutic target for the prevention and treatment of PCO.
90	During early heart development at the looped heart stage, endothelial cells in the outflow tract and atrioventricular (AV) regions transform into mesenchyme to  generate endocardial cushion tissue. This endocardial epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is regulated by several regulatory pathways, including the transforming growth factor-beta (TGFbeta), bone morphogenetic protein (BMP), and  Rho-ROCK pathways. Here, we investigated the spatiotemporal expression pattern of ROCK1 mRNA during EMT in chick and examined whether TGFbeta or BMP could induce the expression of ROCK1. At the onset of EMT, ROCK1 expression was up-regulated in endothelial/mesenchymal cells. A three-dimensional collagen gel assay was used to examine the mechanisms regulating the expression of ROCK1. In AV endocardium co-cultured with associated myocardium, ROCK1 expression was inhibited by either  anti-TGFbeta3 antibody, anti-ALK2 antibody or noggin, but not SB431542 (ALK5 inhibitor). In cultured preactivated AV endocardium, TGFbeta3 protein induced the expression of ROCK1, but BMP did not. AV endothelial cells that were cultured in  medium supplemented with TGFbeta3 plus anti-ALK2 antibody failed to express ROCK1. These results suggest that the expression of ROCK1 is up-regulated at the  onset of EMT and that signaling mediated by TGFbeta3/ALK2 together with BMP is involved in the expression of ROCK1.CI  - (c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.
90161	Many of the ligands involved in developmental processes require HS (heparan sulfate) to modulate signal transduction. hHS6ST2 (human heparan sulfate D-glucosaminyl 6-O-sulfotransferase-2) is a Golgi-resident enzyme that usually acts on GlcA/IdoA(2S)-GlcNAc/NS disaccharide-6-sulfate modifications within the HS sequence. Emerging evidence indicates the importance of 6-O-sulfation in a number of developmental processes. However, any correlation with cancer-related events remains largely unexplored. In the present study, we found that hHS6ST2, but not other variants, was activated in human PC (pancreatic cancer). shRNA (short hairpin RNA)-mediated silencing of endogenous hHS6ST2 expression in the PC cell line PANC-1 inhibited cell invasion and migration. hHS6ST2 knockdown also resulted in markedly reduced tumorigenesis in immunocompromised mice. To specifically explore the molecular alterations resulting from depletion of hHS6ST2-generated 6-O-sulfation, we employed two-dimensional gel electrophoresis  technology followed by nano-HPLC-ESI (electrospray ionization)-tandem MS to separate and identify total proteins from PC cells. Our data suggest that hHS6ST2 potentiates Notch signalling in PC cells. We also identified a role for hHS6ST2 in the growth and tumorigenicity of these cells which, at least in part, acts through Notch-mediated EMT (epithelial-mesenchymal transition) and angiogenesis.  The results of the present study suggest that hHS6ST2 could be an attractive target for PC therapy.
9032	Although cancers can be initially treated with the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) inhibitor, gefitinib, continued gefitinib therapy does not benefit the survival of patients due to acquired resistance through EGFR mutations, c-MET amplification, or epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). It is of further interest to determine whether mesenchymal-like, but not epithelial-like, cancer cells can become resistant to gefitinib by bypassing EGFR signaling and acquiring alternative routes of proliferative and survival signaling. Here we examined whether gefitinib resistance of cancer cells can be caused by transmembrane 4 L six family member 5 (TM4SF5), which has been shown to induce EMT via cytosolic p27Kip1 stabilization. Gefitinib-resistant cells exhibited higher and/or sustained TM4SF5 expression, cytosolic p27Kip1 stabilization, and mesenchymal phenotypes, compared with gefitinib-sensitive cells. Conversion of gefitinib-sensitive to -resistant cells by introduction of the T790M EGFR mutation caused enhanced and sustained expression of TM4SF5, phosphorylation of p27Kip1 Ser10 (responsible for cytosolic location), loss of E-cadherin from cell-cell contacts, and gefitinib-resistant EGFR and survival signaling activities. Additionally, TM4SF5 overexpression lessened the sensitivity of NSCLC cells to gefitinib. Suppression of TM4SF5 or p27Kip1 in gefitinib-resistant cells via the T790M EGFR mutation or TM4SF5 expression rendered them gefitinib-sensitive, displaying more epithelial-like and less mesenchymal-like characteristics. Together, these results indicate that TM4SF5-mediated EMT may have an important function in the gefitinib resistance of cancer cells.CI  - Copyright (c) 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
9076	Disruption of the cell-cell junction with concomitant changes in the expression of junctional proteins is a hallmark of cancer cell invasion and metastasis. The  role of adherent junction proteins has been studied extensively in cancer, but the roles of tight junction (TJ) proteins are less well understood. Claudins are  recently identified members of the tetraspanin family of proteins, which are integral to the structure and function of TJs. Recent studies show changes in expression/cellular localization of claudins during tumorigenesis; however, a causal relationship between claudin expression/localization and cancer has not been established. Here, we report an increased expression of claudin-1 in human primary colon carcinoma and metastasis and in cell lines derived from primary and metastatic tumors. We also report frequent nuclear localization of claudin-1 in these samples. Genetic manipulations of claudin-1 expression in colon cancer cell lines induced changes in cellular phenotype, with structural and functional changes in markers of epithelial-mesenchymal transition. Furthermore, we demonstrate that changes in claudin-1 expression have significant effects on growth of xenografted tumors and metastasis in athymic mice. We further provide data suggesting that the regulation of E-cadherin expression and beta-catenin/Tcf signaling is a possible mechanism underlying claudin-1-dependent changes.
9112	BACKGROUND AND AIMS: The authors have previously isolated a putative oncogene, eukaryotic initiation factor 5A2 (EIF5A2) from 3q26. In this study, EIF5A2 was characterised for its role in colorectal carcinoma (CRC) aggressiveness and underlying molecular mechanisms. METHODS: The expression dynamics of EIF5A2 were  examined by immunohistochemistry in a cohort of carcinomatous and non-neoplastic  colorectal tissues and cells. A series of in-vivo and in-vitro assays was performed to elucidate the function of EIF5A2 in CRC and its underlying mechanisms. RESULTS: The overexpression of EIF5A2 was examined by immunohistochemistry in 102/229 (44.5%) CRC patients, and it was significantly correlated with tumour metastasis and determined to be an independent predictor of shortened survival (p<0.05). Ectopic overexpression of EIF5A2 in CRC cells enhanced cell motility and invasion in vitro and tumour metastasis in vivo, and induced epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). The depletion of EIF5A2 expression prevented CRC cell invasiveness and inhibited EMT. Importantly, the metastasis-associated protein 1 (MTA1) gene was identified as a potential downstream target of EIF5A2 in CRC cells, and knockdown of MTA1 eliminated the augmentation of carcinoma cell migration, invasion and EMT by ectopic EIF5A2. The overexpression of EIF5A2 in CRC cells substantially enhanced the enrichment of c-myc on the promoter of MTA1, and MTA1 upregulation by EIF5A2 was partly dependent on c-myc. CONCLUSION: The data suggest that EIF5A2 plays an important oncogenic role in CRC aggressiveness by the upregulation of MTA1 to induce EMT, and EIF5A2 could be employed as a novel prognostic marker and/or effective therapeutic target for CRC.
9113	The Hippo pathway defines a novel signaling cascade regulating cell proliferation and survival in Drosophila, which involves the negative regulation of the transcriptional coactivator Yorkie by the kinases Hippo and Warts. We have recently shown that the human ortholog of Yorkie, YAP, maps to a minimal amplification locus in mouse and human cancers, and that it mediates dramatic transforming activity in MCF10A primary mammary epithelial cells. Here, we show that LATS proteins (mammalian orthologs of Warts) interact directly with YAP in mammalian cells and that ectopic expression of LATS1, but not LATS2, effectively  suppresses the YAP phenotypes. Furthermore, shRNA-mediated knockdown of LATS1 phenocopies YAP overexpression. Because this effect can be suppressed by simultaneous YAP knockdown, it suggests that YAP is the primary target of LATS1 in mammalian cells. expression profiling of genes induced by ectopic expression of YAP or by knockdown of LATS1 reveals a subset of potential Hippo pathway targets implicated in epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition, suggesting that this  is a key feature of YAP signaling in mammalian cells.
91862	The novel tight junction protein marvelD3 contains a conserved MARVEL (MAL and related proteins for vesicle trafficking and membrane link) domain like occludin  and tricellulin. However, little is yet known about the detailed role and regulation of marvelD3 in normal epithelial cells and cancer cells, including pancreatic cancer. In the present study, we investigated marvelD3 expression in well and poorly differentiated human pancreatic cancer cell lines and normal pancreatic duct epithelial cells in which the hTERT gene was introduced into human pancreatic duct epithelial cells in primary culture, and the changes of marvelD3 during Snail-induced epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) under hypoxia, TGF-beta treatment and knockdown of FOXA2 in well differentiated pancreatic cancer HPAC cells. MarvelD3 was transcriptionally downregulated in poorly differentiated pancreatic cancer cells and during Snail-induced EMT of pancreatic cancer cells in which Snail was highly expressed and the fence function downregulated, whereas it was maintained in well differentiated human pancreatic cancer cells and normal pancreatic duct epithelial cells. Depletion of marvelD3 by siRNAs in HPAC cells resulted in downregulation of barrier functions  indicated as a decrease in transepithelial electric resistance and an increase of permeability to fluorescent dextran tracers, whereas it did not affect fence function of tight junctions. In conclusion, marvelD3 is transcriptionally downregulated in Snail-induced EMT during the progression for the pancreatic cancer.CI  - Copyright (c) 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
92140	PURPOSE: To investigate the expression of metadherin (MTDH) for its prognostic value in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) and its role in promoting HCC metastasis. EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: This study employed a tissue microarray containing samples from 323 HCC patients to examine the expression of MTDH and its correlation with  other clinicopathologic characteristics. The role of MTDH in the regulation of HCC metastasis was investigated both in vitro and in vivo using short hairpin RNA (shRNA)-mediated downregulation of MTDH in HCC cell lines with various metastatic potentials. RESULTS: The expression of MTDH was markedly higher in HCC tumors than in normal liver tissue. Particularly high MTDH expression was observed in tumors with microvascular invasion, pathologic satellites, poor differentiation,  or tumor-node-metastasis stages II to III. Furthermore, the clinical outcome was  consistently poorer for the MTDH(high) group than for the MTDH(low) group in the  1-, 3-, and 5-year overall survival (OS) rates and in the 1-, 3-, 5-year cumulative recurrence rates. In a nude mice model, the shRNA-mediated downregulation of MTDH resulted in a reduced migratory capacity in HCC cell lines, as well as a reduction in pulmonary and abdominal metastasis. Furthermore, we found that the expression level of MTDH correlated with four epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) markers. Knockdown of MTDH expression in  HCC cell lines resulted in downregulation of N-cadherin and snail, upregulation of E-cadherin, and translocation of beta-catenin. CONCLUSIONS: MTDH may promote HCC metastasis through the induction of EMT process and may be a candidate biomarker for prognosis as well as a target for therapy.CI  - (c)2011 AACR.
9241	Bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) play many roles in mammalian cardiac development. Here we address the functions of Noggin, a dedicated BMP antagonist, in the developing mouse heart. In early cardiac tissues, the Noggin gene is mainly expressed in the myocardial cells of the outflow tract, atrioventricular canal, and future right ventricle. The major heart phenotypes of Noggin mutant embryos are thicker myocardium and larger endocardial cushions. Both defects result from increased cell number. Cell proliferation is increased and cell cycle exit is decreased in the myocardium. Although we find evidence of increased BMP signal transduction in the myocardium and endocardium, we show that the cardiac defects of Noggin mutants are rescued by halving the gene dosage of Bmp4. In culture, BMP increases the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transformation (EMT) of endocardial explant cells. Increased EMT likely accounts for the enlarged atrioventricular cushion. In the outflow tract cushion, we observed an increased  contribution of cardiac neural crest cells to the mutant cushion mesenchyme, although many cells of the cushion were not derived from neural crest. Thus the enlarged outflow tract cushion of Noggin mutants likely arises by increased contributions both of endocardial cells that have undergone EMT as well as cells  that have migrated from the neural crest. These data indicate that antagonism of  BMP signaling by Noggin plays a critical role in ensuring proper levels of cell proliferation and EMT during cardiac morphogenesis in the mouse.
9314	epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is implicated in various pathological processes within the prostate, including benign prostate hyperplasia (BPH) and prostate cancer progression. However, an ordered sequence of signaling events initiating carcinoma-associated EMT has not been established. In a model of transforming growth factor beta (TGFbeta)-induced prostatic EMT, SLUG is the dominant regulator of EMT initiation in vitro and in vivo, as demonstrated by the inhibition of EMT following Slug depletion. In contrast, SNAIL depletion was significantly less rate limiting. TGFbeta-stimulated KLF4 degradation is required for SLUG induction. expression of a degradation-resistant KLF4 mutant inhibited EMT, and furthermore, depletion of Klf4 was sufficient to initiate SLUG-dependent EMT. We show that KLF4 and another epithelial determinant, FOXA1, are direct transcriptional inhibitors of SLUG expression in mouse and human prostate cancer  cells. Furthermore, self-reinforcing regulatory loops for SLUG-KLF4 and SLUG-FOXA1 lead to SLUG-dependent binding of polycomb repressive complexes to the Klf4 and Foxa1 promoters, silencing transcription and consolidating mesenchymal commitment. Analysis of tissue arrays demonstrated decreased KLF4 and increased SLUG expression in advanced-stage primary prostate cancer, substantiating the involvement of the EMT signaling events described in model systems.
9365	Aberrant activation of the Wnt/beta-catenin signaling pathway is common in human  cervical cancers. However, the mechanisms of Wnt activation in cervical cancer remain largely unknown. In the present study, we demonstrate that Klotho, a Wnt antagonist, is downregulated in invasive human cervical tumors and in a cell line we analyzed. Our data demonstrated that in vivo Klotho expression was not observed in invasive cervical carcinoma. In vitro restoration of Klotho expression in SiHa cells resulted in a decreased cell motility and invasiveness through upregulation of E-cadherin, downregulation of N-cadherin and reduced expression of MMP7 and -9. Ectopic expression of Klotho also reduced the expression of the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) transcription factors Slug and Twist. Furthermore, Klotho causes a significant inhibition of the Wnt/beta-catenin pathway in cervical cancer cells, as supported by the expression of Wnt/beta-catenin transcriptional target genes such as c-Myc and cyclin D1. Consequently, our findings demonstrate for the first time that Klotho  regulates tumor invasion through the EMT process and provide novel mechanistic insights into the role of Klotho in cervical cancer progression and contribute to treatment for metastatic cervical cancer patients.
9372	SARA has been shown to be a regulator of epithelial cell phenotype, with reduced  expression during TGF-beta1-mediated epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition. Examination of the pathways that might play a role in regulating SARA expression  identified phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) pathway inhibition as sufficient  to reduce SARA expression. The mechanism of PI3K inhibition-mediated SARA down-regulation differs from that induced by TGF-beta1 in that, unlike TGF-beta1, PI3K-dependent depletion of SARA was apparent within 6 h and did not occur at the mRNA or promoter level but was blocked by inhibition of proteasome-mediated degradation. This effect was independent of Akt activity because neither reducing nor enhancing Akt activity modulated the expression of SARA. Therefore, this is likely a direct effect of p85alpha action, and co-immunoprecipitation of SARA and p85alpha confirmed that these proteins interact. Both SARA and PI3K have been shown to be associated with endosomes, and either LY294002 or p85alpha knockdown  enlarged SARA-containing endocytic vesicles. Inhibition of clathrin-mediated endocytosis blocked SARA down-regulation, and a localization-deficient mutant SARA was protected against down-regulation. As inhibiting PI3K can activate the endosomal fusion-regulatory small GTPase Rab5, we expressed GTPase-deficient Rab5 and observed endosomal enlargement and reduced SARA protein expression, similar to that seen with PI3K inhibition. Importantly, either interference with PI3K via LY294002 or p85alpha knockdown, or constitutive activity of the Rab5 pathway, enhanced the expression of smooth muscle alpha-actin. Together, these data suggest that although TGF-beta1 can induce epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition through reduction in SARA expression, SARA is also basally regulated by its interaction with PI3K.
94025	BACKGROUND: epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) cells are prone to metastasise throughout the peritoneal cavity. The epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT)  is a necessary step towards metastatic tumour progression. CA125/MUC16 mucin is a high-molecular-weight glycoprotein overexpressed in the majority of serous carcinomas, suggesting a possible role in the pathogenesis of these cancers. METHODS: The role of CA125/MUC16 in EMT was investigated using single-chain antibody-mediated knockdown of cell surface CA125/MUC16 in overexpressing EOC NIH:OVCAR3 cells. RESULTS: CA125/MUC16 knockdown was associated with morphological alterations along with decreased surface expression of epithelial markers (E-cadherin, cytokeratin-18) and increased expression of mesenchymal markers (N-cadherin, vimentin). Co-immunoprecipitation experiments revealed that  CA125/MUC16 binds to E-cadherin and beta-catenin complexes. The in vitro studies  showed disruption of cell-cell junctions, enhanced motility, migration and invasiveness in CA125/MUC16 knockdown cells. Enhanced epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) activation was observed in CA125/MUC16 knockdown cells along with increased Akt and ERK1/2 phosphorylation, which are downstream effectors of EGFR, and increased MMP-2 and MMP-9 expression and activities. Epidermal growth factor  receptor inhibition strongly inhibited the motility of CA125/MUC16 knockdown cells. CONCLUSIONS: Our findings suggest that CA125/MUC16 plays a role in EMT, presumably through its interaction with E-cadherin and beta-catenin complexes and by modulating EGFR and its downstream signalling pathway in NIH:OVCAR3 cells.
94234	epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) promotes cancer invasion and metastasis,  but the integrative mechanisms that coordinate these processes are incompletely understood. In this study, we used a cross-species expression profiling strategy  in metastatic cell lines of human and mouse origin to identify 22 up-regulated and 12 down-regulated genes that are part of an essential genetic program in metastasis. In particular, we identified a novel function in metastasis that was  not previously known for the transcription factor Forkhead Box Q1 (Foxq1). Ectopic expression of Foxq1 increased cell migration and invasion in vitro, enhanced the lung metastatic capabilities of mammary epithelial cells in vivo, and triggered a marked EMT. In contrast, Foxq1 knockdown elicited converse effects on these phenotypes in vitro and in vivo. Neither ectopic expression nor  knockdown of Foxq1 significantly affected cell proliferation or colony formation  in vitro. Notably, Foxq1 repressed expression of the core EMT regulator E-cadherin by binding to the E-box in its promoter region. Further mechanistic investigation revealed that Foxq1 expression is regulated by TGF-beta1, and that  Foxq1 knockdown blocked TGF-beta1-induced EMT at both morphological and molecular levels. Our findings highlight the feasibility of cross-species expression profiling as a strategy to identify metastasis-related genes, and they reveal that EMT induction is a likely mechanism underlying a novel metastasis-promoting  function of Foxq1 defined here in breast cancer.CI  - (c)2011 AACR.
9475	BACKGROUND: Recent profile studies of microRNA (miRNA) expression have documented a deregulation of miRNA (miR-124) in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). OBJECTIVE: To determine the status of miR-124 expression and its underlying mechanisms in the pathogenesis of HCC. METHODS: The expression levels of miR-124 were first examined in HCC cell lines and tumour tissues by real-time PCR. The in vitro and  in vivo functional effect of miR-124 was examined further. A luciferase reporter  assay was conducted to confirm target associations. RESULTS: The expression levels of miR-124 were frequently reduced in HCC cells and tissues, and low-level expression of miR-124 was significantly associated with a more aggressive and/or  poor prognostic phenotype of patients with HCC (p<0.05). In HCC cell lines, stable overexpression of miR-124 was sufficient to inhibit cell motility and invasion in vitro, and suppress intrahepatic and pulmonary metastasis in vivo. In addition, ectopic overexpression of miR-124 in HCC cells inhibited epithelial-mesenchymal cell transition, formation of stress fibres, filopodia and lamellipodia. Further studies showed that miR-124 could directly target the 3'-untranslated region (3'-UTR) of both ROCK2 and EZH2 mRNAs, and suppress their  mRNA and protein expressions. These findings suggest that miR-124 plays a critical role in regulating cytoskeletal events and epithelial-mesenchymal cell transition and, ultimately, inhibits the invasive and/or metastatic potential of  HCC, probably by its direct target on ROCK2 and EZH2 genes. These results provide functional and mechanistic links between the tumour suppressor miRNA-124 and the  two oncogenes ROCK2 and EZH2 on the aggressive nature of HCC. CONCLUSION: These data highlight an important role for miR-124 in the regulation of invasion and metastasis in the molecular aetiology of HCC, and suggest a potential application of miR-124 in prognosis prediction and cancer treatment.
9500	Detachment of epithelial cells from matrix or attachment to an inappropriate matrix engages an apoptotic response known as anoikis, which prevents metastasis. Cellular sensitivity to anoikis is compromised during the oncogenic epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT), through unknown mechanisms. We report here a pathway through which EMT confers anoikis resistance. NRAGE (neurotrophin  receptor-interacting melanoma antigen) interacted with a component of the E-cadherin complex, ankyrin-G, maintaining NRAGE in the cytoplasm. Oncogenic EMT  downregulated ankyrin-G, enhancing the nuclear localization of NRAGE. The oncogenic transcriptional repressor protein TBX2 interacted with NRAGE, repressing the tumor suppressor gene p14ARF. P14ARF sensitized cells to anoikis;  conversely, the TBX2/NRAGE complex protected cells against anoikis by downregulating this gene. This represents a novel pathway for the regulation of anoikis by EMT and E-cadherin.
960	The epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) has been linked to induction of a stem-cell like phenotype, characterized by altered cell surface marker expression and increased tumor formation. The aim of this study was to investigate whether EMT correlates with CD24+CD44+ and CD133+ cells in pancreatic cancer. The morphology of untreated and gemcitabine-treated SW1990 gemcitabine-resistant cells and normal SW1990 cells were compared. NF-kappaB p65 expression was knocked down using siRNA. Vimentin and E-cadherin expression were analyzed using western  blotting, and CD24+CD44+, CD133+ cells were quantified by FACS. Additionally, immunohistochemistry of EMT-associated markers and stem cell-associated markers were performed in 41 cases of human pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma. In SW1990 gemcitabine-resistant cells, gemcitabine induced a mesenchymal cell phenotype, expression of EMT-related molecular markers and increased CD24+CD44+ and CD133+ cells compared to untreated SW1990 gemcitabine-resistant and SW1990 cells. Knockdown of NF-kappaB p65 inhibited the ability of gemcitabine to increase the proportion of CD24+CD44+ or CD133+ cells and expression of EMT-related molecular  markers. In human pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma, significant correlations were observed between expression of the EMT-associated markers vimentin and E-cadherin, and stem cell-associated markers CD24, CD133 and CD44. This study demonstrated that EMT correlated with CD24+CD44+ and CD133+ cells in pancreatic cancer. This study also suggests that EMT may induce cancer stem-like cells in pancreatic cancer, with different degrees of EMT probability inducing different proportions of CD24+CD44+ and CD133+ cells.
9723	cancer cells often employ developmental cues for advantageous growth and metastasis. Here, we report that an axon guidance molecule, Sema3E, is highly expressed in human high-grade ovarian endometrioid carcinoma, but not low-grade or other ovarian epithelial tumors, and facilitates tumor progression. Unlike its known angiogenic activity, Sema3E acted through Plexin-D1 receptors to augment cell migratory ability and concomitant epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT). Sema3E-induced EMT in ovarian endometrioid cancer cells was dependent on nuclear localization of Snail1 through activation of phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase and ERK/MAPK. RNAi-mediated knockdown of Sema3E, Plexin-D1 or Snail1 in Sema3E-expressing tumor cells resulted in compromised cell motility, concurrent reversion of EMT and diminished nuclear localization of Snail1. By contrast, forced retention of Snail1 within the nucleus of Sema3E-negative tumor cells induced EMT and enhanced cell motility. These results show that in addition to the angiogenic effects of Sema3E on tumor vascular endothelium, an EMT strategy could be exploited by Sema3E/Plexin-D1 signaling in  tumor cells to promote cellular invasion/migration.
9839	The epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a developmental process enabling epithelial cells to gain a migratory mesenchymal phenotype. In cancer, this process contributes to metastases; however the regulatory signals and mechanistic details are not fully elucidated. Here, we sought to identify the subset of genes regulated in lung cancer by ZEB1, an E-box transcriptional repressor known to induce EMT. Using an Affymetrix-based expression database of 38 non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cell lines, we identified 324 genes that correlated negatively with ZEB1 and 142 that were positively correlated. A mesenchymal gene pattern (low E-cadherin, high Vimentin or N-cadherin) was significantly associated with ZEB1 and ZEB2, but not with Snail, Slug, Twist1 or  Twist2. Among eight genes selected for validation, seven were confirmed to correlate with ZEB1 by quantitative real-time RT-PCR in a series of 22 NSCLC cell lines, either negatively (CDS1, EpCAM, ESRP1, ESRP2, ST14) or positively (FGFR1,  Vimentin). In addition, over-expression or knockdown of ZEB1 led to corresponding changes in gene expression, demonstrating that these genes are also regulated by  ZEB1, either directly or indirectly. Of note, the combined knockdown of ZEB1 and  ZEB2 led to apparent synergistic responses in gene expression. Furthermore, these responses were not restricted to artificial settings, since most genes were similarly regulated during a physiologic induction of EMT by TGF-beta plus EGF. Finally, the absence of ST14 (matriptase) was linked to ZEB1 positivity in lung cancer tissue microarrays, implying that the regulation observed in vitro applies to the human disease. In summary, this study identifies a new set of ZEB-regulated genes in human lung cancer cells and supports the hypothesis that ZEB1 and ZEB2 are key regulators of the EMT process in this disease.CI  - Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.
9846	Ovarian cancer, the most deadly gynecologic malignancy, is often diagnosed late and at the advanced stage when the cancer cells have already migrated and invaded into other tissues and organs. Better understanding of the mechanism of metastasis in ovarian cancer cells is essential to the design of effective therapy. In this study, we investigated the function of scaffolding adaptor protein Gab2 in ovarian cancer cells. Gab2 is found to be overexpressed in a subset of ovarian tumors and cancer cell lines. Gab2 expression mainly regulates  the migratory behaviors of ovarian cancer cells. Overexpression of Gab2 promotes  the migration and invasion, and downregulates E-cadherin expression in ovarian cancer cells with low-Gab2 expression. Conversely, knockdown of Gab2 expression inhibits the migration and invasion, and promotes E-cadherin expression in ovarian cancer cells with high-Gab2 expression. By expressing Gab2 wild-type and  Gab2 mutants that are defective in activation of the PI3K and Shp2-Erk pathways,  we find that Gab2 inhibits E-cadherin expression and enhances the expression of Zeb1, a transcription factor involved in epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT), and cell migration and invasion through the activation of the PI3K pathway. Knockdown of Zeb1 expression blocks Gab2-induced suppression of E-cadherin expression and increase in cell invasion. LY294002 and GDC-0941, inhibitors of PI3K, or Rapamycin, an inhibitor of PI3K downstream target mTOR, can reverse the effects of Gab2 on migration and invasion. Overall, our studies reveal that Gab2 overexpression, via activation of the PI3K-Zeb1 pathway, promotes characteristics of EMT in ovarian cancer cells.
9953	epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a critical early event in tumorigenesis. The contribution of heparan sulfate (HS) to EMT has not been fully elucidated. HS D-glucosaminyl 3-O-sulfotransferase-3B1 (3-OST-3B1) participates in the final step of HS fine structure biosynthesis, whose involvement in cancer  has yet to be determined. This study demonstrated that following treatment with trichostatin-A, a histone deacetylase inhibitor, 3-OST-3B1 gene expression was activated in the pancreatic cancer cell line, PANC-1. By chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis, permissive histone modifications including an increase in histone H3 lysine 9 monoactylation (H3 ac K9) but a decrease in methylated histone H3 (H3 me K9) were observed accompanying transcriptional activation of 3-OST-3B1. Functional, results revealed that increased 3-OST-3B1 levels were involved in the promotion of EMT processes. In vitro studies demonstrated that overexpression of 3-OST-3B1 in both pancreatic cancer cells and vascular endothelial cells could trigger an EMT-like phenotype as evidenced by the up-regulation of Snail at the mRNA and protein level, and its nuclear translocation. And 3-OST-3B1 appeared to be sufficient for the development of a more mesenchymal phenotype in vivo. Together, the results from this study unveiled a distinct function for 3-OST-3B1 as an EMT inducer in cancer and provided a link between histone modification and EMT modulation.
999	The evolution of the cancer cell into a metastatic entity is the major cause of death in patients with cancer. Activation of the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) endows invasive and metastatic properties upon cancer cells that favor successful colonization of distal target organs. The observation that in many cancers distant metastases resemble the epithelial phenotype of primary tumors has led to speculation that the disseminated tumor cells recruited to the  target organs undergo mesenchymal-to-epithelial transition (MET). However, the MET cascade has not been recapitulated in vivo, and the cellular and molecular regulators that promote MET remain unknown. In a recent report, using a model of  spontaneous breast cancer, we have shown that bone marrow-derived myeloid progenitor cells in the premetastatic lung secrete the proteoglycan versican, which induces MET of metastatic tumor cells and accelerates metastases. This review summarizes recent progress in MET research, outlines a unique paracrine cross-talk between the microenvironment and the cancer cells, which promotes tumor outgrowth in the metastatic organ, and discusses opportunities for novel antimetastatic approaches for cancer therapy.CI  - (c)2012 AACR.
